В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.

FIXED INCOME

CFAВ® Program Curriculum
2025 вҖў LEVEL 1 вҖў VOLUME 6

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.

В©2023 by CFA Institute. All rights reserved. This copyright covers material written
expressly for this volume by the editor/s as well as the compilation itself. It does
not cover the individual selections herein that first appeared elsewhere. Permission
to reprint these has been obtained by CFA Institute for this edition only. Further
reproductions by any means, electronic or mechanical, including photocopying and
recording, or by any information storage or retrieval systems, must be arranged with
the individual copyright holders noted.
CFAВ®, Chartered Financial AnalystВ®, AIMR-PPSВ®, and GIPSВ® are just a few of the
trademarks owned by CFA Institute. To view a list of CFA Institute trademarks and the
Guide for Use of CFA Institute Marks, please visit our website at wwwвҖӢ.cfainstituteвҖӢ.org.
This publication is designed to provide accurate and authoritative information
in regard to the subject matter covered. It is sold with the understanding that the
publisher is not engaged in rendering legal, accounting, or other professional service.
If legal advice or other expert assistance is required, the services of a competent professional should be sought.
All trademarks, service marks, registered trademarks, and registered service marks
are the property of their respective owners and are used herein for identification
purposes only.
ISBN 9781961409033 (paper)
ISBN 9781961409156 (ebook)
May 2024

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.

CONTENTS
How to Use the CFA Program CurriculumвҖғвҖғ	
CFA Institute Learning Ecosystem (LES)вҖғвҖғ	
Designing Your Personal Study ProgramвҖғвҖғ	
ErrataвҖғвҖғ	
Other FeedbackвҖғвҖғ	

ix
ix
ix
x
x

Learning Module 1

Fixed-Income Instrument FeaturesвҖғвҖғ	
IntroductionвҖғвҖғ	
Features of Fixed-Income SecuritiesвҖғвҖғ	
IssuerвҖғвҖғ	
MaturityвҖғвҖғ	
Principal (Par or Face Value)вҖғвҖғ	
Coupon Rate and FrequencyвҖғвҖғ	
SeniorityвҖғвҖғ	
Contingency ProvisionsвҖғвҖғ	
Yield MeasuresвҖғвҖғ	
Yield CurvesвҖғвҖғ	
Bond Indentures and CovenantsвҖғвҖғ	
Bond IndenturesвҖғвҖғ	
Sources of RepaymentвҖғвҖғ	
Bond CovenantsвҖғвҖғ	
Practice ProblemsвҖғвҖғ	
SolutionsвҖғвҖғ	

3
3
6
8
8
9
9
10
10
11
11
14
14
14
16
20
22

Learning Module 2

Fixed-Income Cash Flows and TypesвҖғвҖғ	
IntroductionвҖғвҖғ	
Fixed-Income Cash Flow StructuresвҖғвҖғ	
Amortizing DebtвҖғвҖғ	
Variable Interest DebtвҖғвҖғ	
Zero-Coupon StructuresвҖғвҖғ	
Deferred Coupon StructuresвҖғвҖғ	
Fixed-Income Contingency ProvisionsвҖғвҖғ	
Callable BondsвҖғвҖғ	
Putable BondsвҖғвҖғ	
Convertible BondsвҖғвҖғ	
Legal, Regulatory, and Tax ConsiderationsвҖғвҖғ	
Legal and Regulatory ConsiderationsвҖғвҖғ	
Tax ConsiderationsвҖғвҖғ	
Practice ProblemsвҖғвҖғ	
SolutionsвҖғвҖғ	

23
23
26
27
32
36
36
39
39
40
40
44
44
47
51
53

Fixed Income

iv

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.

Contents

Learning Module 3

Fixed-Income Issuance and TradingвҖғвҖғ	
IntroductionвҖғвҖғ	
Fixed-Income Segments, Issuers, and InvestorsвҖғвҖғ	
Fixed-Income IndexesвҖғвҖғ	
Primary and Secondary Fixed-Income MarketsвҖғвҖғ	
Primary Fixed-Income MarketsвҖғвҖғ	
Secondary Fixed-Income MarketsвҖғвҖғ	
Practice ProblemsвҖғвҖғ	
SolutionsвҖғвҖғ	

55
55
57
65
70
70
72
75
76

Learning Module 4

Fixed-Income Markets for Corporate IssuersвҖғвҖғ	
IntroductionвҖғвҖғ	
Short-Term Funding AlternativesвҖғвҖғ	
External Loan FinancingвҖғвҖғ	
External, Security-Based FinancingвҖғвҖғ	
Short-Term Funding Alternatives for Financial InstitutionsвҖғвҖғ	
Repurchase AgreementsвҖғвҖғ	
Repurchase Agreement Applications and BenefitsвҖғвҖғ	
Risks Associated with Repurchase AgreementsвҖғвҖғ	
Long-Term Corporate DebtвҖғвҖғ	
Similarities between Long-Term Investment-Grade and High-Yield
IssuanceвҖғвҖғ	
Differences between IG and HY IssuanceвҖғвҖғ	
Practice ProblemsвҖғвҖғ	
SolutionsвҖғвҖғ	

77
77
80
80
82
82
86
89
92
95
96
96
102
104

Learning Module 5

Fixed-Income Markets for Government IssuersвҖғвҖғ	
IntroductionвҖғвҖғ	
Sovereign DebtвҖғвҖғ	
Sovereign Debt Issuance and TradingвҖғвҖғ	
Non-Sovereign, Quasi-Government, and Supranational Agency DebtвҖғвҖғ	
Government AgenciesвҖғвҖғ	
Local and Regional Government AuthoritiesвҖғвҖғ	
Supranational OrganizationsвҖғвҖғ	
Practice ProblemsвҖғвҖғ	
SolutionsвҖғвҖғ	

105
105
107
115
118
119
119
120
123
124

Learning Module 6

Fixed-Income Bond Valuation: Prices and YieldsвҖғвҖғ	
IntroductionвҖғвҖғ	
Bond Pricing and the Time Value of MoneyвҖғвҖғ	
Bond Pricing with a Market Discount RateвҖғвҖғ	
Yield-to-MaturityвҖғвҖғ	
Flat Price, Accrued Interest, and the Full PriceвҖғвҖғ	
Relationships between Bond Prices and Bond FeaturesвҖғвҖғ	
Inverse RelationshipвҖғвҖғ	
Coupon EffectвҖғвҖғ	
Maturity EffectвҖғвҖғ	
Constant-Yield Price TrajectoryвҖғвҖғ	

125
125
129
130
132
134
141
142
142
143
143

Contents

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.

Convexity EffectвҖғвҖғ	
Matrix PricingвҖғвҖғ	
Matrix Pricing ProcessвҖғвҖғ	
Practice ProblemsвҖғвҖғ	
SolutionsвҖғвҖғ	

v

144
146
147
151
153

Learning Module 7

Yield and Yield Spread Measures for Fixed-Rate BondsвҖғвҖғ	
155
IntroductionвҖғвҖғ	
155
Periodicity and Annualized YieldsвҖғвҖғ	
158
Other Yield Measures, Conventions, and Accounting for Embedded OptionsвҖғвҖғ	163
Other Yield Measures and ConventionsвҖғвҖғ	
163
Bonds with Embedded OptionsвҖғвҖғ	
167
Yield Spread Measures for Fixed-Rate Bonds and Matrix PricingвҖғвҖғ	
171
Yield Spreads over Benchmark RatesвҖғвҖғ	
171
Yield Spreads over the Benchmark Yield CurveвҖғвҖғ	
176
Practice ProblemsвҖғвҖғ	
181
SolutionsвҖғвҖғ	
183

Learning Module 8

Yield and Yield Spread Measures for Floating-Rate InstrumentsвҖғвҖғ	
IntroductionвҖғвҖғ	
Yield and Yield Spread Measures for Floating-Rate NotesвҖғвҖғ	
Yield and Yield Spread Measures for Floating-Rate InstrumentsвҖғвҖғ	
Yield Measures for Money Market InstrumentsвҖғвҖғ	
Practice ProblemsвҖғвҖғ	
SolutionsвҖғвҖғ	

Learning Module 9

The Term Structure of Interest Rates: Spot, Par, and Forward CurvesвҖғвҖғ	 207
IntroductionвҖғвҖғ	
207
Maturity Structure of Interest Rates and Spot RatesвҖғвҖғ	
209
Maturity Structure of Interest RatesвҖғвҖғ	
210
Bond Pricing Using Spot RatesвҖғвҖғ	
212
Par and Forward RatesвҖғвҖғ	
217
Par Rates from Spot RatesвҖғвҖғ	
217
Forward Rates from Spot RatesвҖғвҖғ	
218
Spot Rates from Forward Rates and Bond Pricing with Forward RatesвҖғвҖғ	 220
Spot, Par, and Forward Yield Curves and Interpreting Their RelationshipвҖғвҖғ	
225
Practice ProblemsвҖғвҖғ	
230
SolutionsвҖғвҖғ	
233

Learning Module 10

Interest Rate Risk and ReturnвҖғвҖғ	
IntroductionвҖғвҖғ	
Sources of Return from Investing in a Fixed-Rate BondвҖғвҖғ	
Investment Horizon and Interest Rate RiskвҖғвҖғ	
Macaulay DurationвҖғвҖғ	
Practice ProblemsвҖғвҖғ	
SolutionsвҖғвҖғ	

185
185
188
188
194
203
205

235
235
239
245
251
258
260

vi

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.

Contents

Learning Module 11

Yield-Based Bond Duration Measures and PropertiesвҖғвҖғ	
IntroductionвҖғвҖғ	
Modified DurationвҖғвҖғ	
Approximate Modified DurationвҖғвҖғ	
Money Duration and Price Value of a Basis PointвҖғвҖғ	
Yield Duration of Zero-Coupon and Perpetual BondsвҖғвҖғ	
Duration of Floating-Rate Notes and LoansвҖғвҖғ	
Properties of DurationвҖғвҖғ	
Practice ProblemsвҖғвҖғ	
SolutionsвҖғвҖғ	

263
263
266
270
278
279
280
284
289
291

Learning Module 12

Yield-Based Bond Convexity and Portfolio PropertiesвҖғвҖғ	
IntroductionвҖғвҖғ	
Bond Convexity and Convexity AdjustmentвҖғвҖғ	
Bond Risk and Return Using Duration and ConvexityвҖғвҖғ	
Portfolio Duration and ConvexityвҖғвҖғ	
Practice ProblemsвҖғвҖғ	
SolutionsвҖғвҖғ	

293
293
297
303
307
312
314

Learning Module 13

Curve-Based and Empirical Fixed-Income Risk MeasuresвҖғвҖғ	
IntroductionвҖғвҖғ	
Curve-Based Interest Rate Risk MeasuresвҖғвҖғ	
Bond Risk and Return Using Curve-Based Duration and ConvexityвҖғвҖғ	
Key Rate Duration as a Measure of Yield Curve RiskвҖғвҖғ	
Empirical DurationвҖғвҖғ	
Practice ProblemsвҖғвҖғ	
SolutionsвҖғвҖғ	

317
317
320
326
329
333
337
339

Learning Module 14

Credit RiskвҖғвҖғ	
IntroductionвҖғвҖғ	
Sources of Credit RiskвҖғвҖғ	
Sources of Credit RiskвҖғвҖғ	
Measuring Credit RiskвҖғвҖғ	
Credit Rating Agencies and Credit RatingsвҖғвҖғ	
Credit RatingsвҖғвҖғ	
Credit Rating ConsiderationsвҖғвҖғ	
Factors Impacting Yield SpreadsвҖғвҖғ	
Macroeconomic FactorsвҖғвҖғ	
Market FactorsвҖғвҖғ	
Issuer-Specific FactorsвҖғвҖғ	
The Price Impact of Spread ChangesвҖғвҖғ	
Practice ProblemsвҖғвҖғ	
SolutionsвҖғвҖғ	

341
341
344
346
349
355
356
357
361
361
364
365
367
375
377

Learning Module 15

Credit Analysis for Government IssuersвҖғвҖғ	
IntroductionвҖғвҖғ	
Sovereign Credit AnalysisвҖғвҖғ	
Qualitative FactorsвҖғвҖғ	

379
379
382
383

Contents

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.

vii

Quantitative FactorsвҖғвҖғ	
Non-Sovereign Credit RiskвҖғвҖғ	
Non-Sovereign Government DebtвҖғвҖғ	
AgenciesвҖғвҖғ	
Government Sector Banks and Development Financing InstitutionsвҖғвҖғ	
Supranational IssuersвҖғвҖғ	
Regional Government IssuersвҖғвҖғ	
Practice ProblemsвҖғвҖғ	
SolutionsвҖғвҖғ	

387
395
395
396
396
397
397
402
404

Learning Module 16

Credit Analysis for Corporate IssuersвҖғвҖғ	
IntroductionвҖғвҖғ	
Assessing Corporate CreditworthinessвҖғвҖғ	
Qualitative FactorsвҖғвҖғ	
Financial Ratios in Corporate Credit AnalysisвҖғвҖғ	
Seniority Rankings, Recovery Rates, and Credit RatingsвҖғвҖғ	
Seniority RankingsвҖғвҖғ	
Secured versus Unsecured DebtвҖғвҖғ	
Recovery RatesвҖғвҖғ	
Issuer and Issue RatingsвҖғвҖғ	
Practice ProblemsвҖғвҖғ	
SolutionsвҖғвҖғ	

407
407
410
410
417
424
425
425
427
429
433
436

Learning Module 17

Fixed-Income SecuritizationвҖғвҖғ	
IntroductionвҖғвҖғ	
The Benefits of SecuritizationвҖғвҖғ	
Benefits to IssuersвҖғвҖғ	
Benefits to InvestorsвҖғвҖғ	
Benefits to Economies and Financial MarketsвҖғвҖғ	
The Securitization ProcessвҖғвҖғ	
An Example of a SecuritizationвҖғвҖғ	
Parties to a SecuritizationвҖғвҖғ	
The Role of the SPEвҖғвҖғ	
Practice ProblemsвҖғвҖғ	
SolutionsвҖғвҖғ	

439
439
442
444
445
446
448
449
452
453
456
459

Learning Module 18

Asset-Backed Security (ABS) Instrument and Market FeaturesвҖғвҖғ	
IntroductionвҖғвҖғ	
Covered BondsвҖғвҖғ	
ABS Structures to Address Credit RiskвҖғвҖғ	
Credit EnhancementвҖғвҖғ	
Credit TranchingвҖғвҖғ	
Non-Mortgage Asset-Backed SecuritiesвҖғвҖғ	
Credit Card Receivable ABSвҖғвҖғ	
Solar ABSвҖғвҖғ	
Collateralized Debt ObligationsвҖғвҖғ	
Generic CLO StructureвҖғвҖғ	
Practice ProblemsвҖғвҖғ	

461
461
464
468
468
470
475
475
478
481
483
488

viii

Learning Module 19

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.

Contents

SolutionsвҖғвҖғ	

490

Mortgage-Backed Security (MBS) Instrument and Market FeaturesвҖғвҖғ	
IntroductionвҖғвҖғ	
Time TranchingвҖғвҖғ	
Prepayment RiskвҖғвҖғ	
Mortgage Loans and Their Characteristic FeaturesвҖғвҖғ	
Agency and Non-Agency RMBSвҖғвҖғ	
Mortgage Contingency FeaturesвҖғвҖғ	
Residential Mortgage-Backed Securities (RMBS)вҖғвҖғ	
Mortgage Pass-Through SecuritiesвҖғвҖғ	
Collateralized Mortgage Obligations (CMOs)вҖғвҖғ	
Other CMO StructuresвҖғвҖғ	
Commercial Mortgage-Backed Securities (CMBS)вҖғвҖғ	
CMBS StructureвҖғвҖғ	
CMBS RisksвҖғвҖғ	
Practice ProblemsвҖғвҖғ	
SolutionsвҖғвҖғ	

493
493
498
498
502
504
504
507
508
510
512
515
517
518
522
527

GlossaryвҖғвҖғ	

G-1

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.

How to Use the CFA
Program Curriculum
The CFAВ® Program exams measure your mastery of the core knowledge, skills, and
abilities required to succeed as an investment professional. These core competencies
are the basis for the Candidate Body of Knowledge (CBOKв„ў). The CBOK consists of
four components:
A broad outline that lists the major CFA Program topic areas (wwwвҖӢ
.cfainstituteвҖӢ.org/вҖӢprograms/вҖӢcfa/вҖӢcurriculum/вҖӢcbok/вҖӢcbok)
Topic area weights that indicate the relative exam weightings of the top-level
topic areas (wwwвҖӢ.cfainstituteвҖӢ.org/вҖӢen/вҖӢprograms/вҖӢcfa/вҖӢcurriculum)
Learning outcome statements (LOS) that advise candidates about the
specific knowledge, skills, and abilities they should acquire from curriculum content covering a topic area: LOS are provided at the beginning of
each block of related content and the specific lesson that covers them. We
encourage you to review the information about the LOS on our website
(wwwвҖӢ.cfainstituteвҖӢ.org/вҖӢprograms/вҖӢcfa/вҖӢcurriculum/вҖӢstudyвҖӢ-sessions), including
the descriptions of LOS вҖңcommand wordsвҖқ on the candidate resources page
at wwwвҖӢ.cfainstituteвҖӢ.org/вҖӢ-/вҖӢmedia/вҖӢdocuments/вҖӢsupport/вҖӢprograms/вҖӢcfaвҖӢ-andвҖӢ
-cipmвҖӢ-losвҖӢ-commandвҖӢ-wordsвҖӢ.ashx.
The CFA Program curriculum that candidates receive access to upon exam
registration
Therefore, the key to your success on the CFA exams is studying and understanding
the CBOK. You can learn more about the CBOK on our website: wwwвҖӢ.cfainstituteвҖӢ
.org/вҖӢprograms/вҖӢcfa/вҖӢcurriculum/вҖӢcbok.
The curriculum, including the practice questions, is the basis for all exam questions.
The curriculum is selected or developed specifically to provide candidates with the
knowledge, skills, and abilities reflected in the CBOK.

CFA INSTITUTE LEARNING ECOSYSTEM (LES)
Your exam registration fee includes access to the CFA Institute Learning Ecosystem
(LES). This digital learning platform provides access, even offline, to all the curriculum
content and practice questions. The LES is organized as a series of learning modules
consisting of short online lessons and associated practice questions. This tool is your
source for all study materials, including practice questions and mock exams. The LES
is the primary method by which CFA Institute delivers your curriculum experience.
Here, candidates will find additional practice questions to test their knowledge. Some
questions in the LES provide a unique interactive experience.

DESIGNING YOUR PERSONAL STUDY PROGRAM
An orderly, systematic approach to exam preparation is critical. You should dedicate
a consistent block of time every week to reading and studying. Review the LOS both
before and after you study curriculum content to ensure you can demonstrate the

ix

x

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
How to Use the CFA Program Curriculum

knowledge, skills, and abilities described by the LOS and the assigned reading. Use
the LOS as a self-check to track your progress and highlight areas of weakness for
later review.
Successful candidates report an average of more than 300 hours preparing for each
exam. Your preparation time will vary based on your prior education and experience,
and you will likely spend more time on some topics than on others.

ERRATA
The curriculum development process is rigorous and involves multiple rounds of
reviews by content experts. Despite our efforts to produce a curriculum that is free of
errors, in some instances, we must make corrections. Curriculum errata are periodically
updated and posted by exam level and test date on the Curriculum Errata webpage
(wwwвҖӢ.cfainstituteвҖӢ.org/вҖӢen/вҖӢprograms/вҖӢsubmitвҖӢ-errata). If you believe you have found an
error in the curriculum, you can submit your concerns through our curriculum errata
reporting process found at the bottom of the Curriculum Errata webpage.

OTHER FEEDBACK
Please send any comments or suggestions to info@вҖӢcfainstituteвҖӢ.org, and we will review
your feedback thoughtfully.

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.

Fixed Income

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.

LEARNING MODULE

1

Fixed-Income Instrument Features
LEARNING OUTCOMES
Mastery

The candidate should be able to:
describe the features of a fixed-income security
describe the contents of a bond indenture and contrast affirmative
and negative covenants

INTRODUCTION
Fixed-income instruments, such as loans and bonds, are the most common means of
financing. Fixed-income issuers include businesses, governments, and not-for-profits
that promise to pay interest and repay borrowed principal to investors. Loans are
commonly used between an individual or company and a bank. Bonds are more standardized fixed-income instruments designed to be more easily tradeable than loans
and are commonly issued by larger companies, governments, and special purpose
issuers. Bonds are a core holding for many investors, including mutual funds, pension
plans, insurance companies, and central banks. This module introduces the features
of fixed-income instruments and the legal contracts that govern them.
LEARNING MODULE OVERVIEW
в– 

Fixed-income instruments are debt instruments, such as loans
and bonds, that represent a contractual agreement under
which an issuer borrows money from investors in exchange for interest and future repayment of principal.

в– 

Key features of fixed-income instruments include the issuer (borrower), time to maturity, principal amount, coupon rate and frequency, seniority, and contingency provisions. These features in turn
define the cash flow structure of the instrument.

в– 

A fixed-income investor (lender) receives a return or yield based on
the periodic cash flows paid by the bond issuer and the change in price
of the bond. A bondвҖҷs price and yield vary inversely with one another.

1

4

Learning Module 1

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
Fixed-Income Instrument Features

в– 

Fixed-income investors are exposed to credit risk, the risk of loss
resulting from the issuer failing to make full and timely payments of
interest and/or to repay principal. Investors expect to earn the lowest
yield on bonds that carry little or no credit risk and expect higher
yields on lower-credit-quality instruments.

в– 

A fixed-income instrumentвҖҷs credit quality is affected by the underlying source of repayment, its seniority, credit provisions such as collateral backing, and the issuerвҖҷs willingness to pay.

в– 

The legal contract describing the features and other terms of a
fixed-income security is known as an indenture.

в– 

Indentures often contain covenants, or legally enforceable terms,
agreed to at the time of issuance. These may either require the bond
issuer to take an action or prohibit the issuer from performing some
action.

LEARNING MODULE SELF-ASSESSMENT
These initial questions are intended to help you gauge your current level
of understanding of this learning module.
1. The annual coupon amount for a fixed-rate bond is calculated by:
A. multiplying its yield by the par value of the bond.
B. Multiplying its coupon rate by the price of the bond.
C. Multiplying its coupon rate by the par value of the bond.
Solution:
C is correct. On each interest payment date, a fixed-rate bond issuer pays
investors a coupon payment equal to the bondвҖҷs coupon rate times its par
value. For periods shorter than a year, the annual coupon amount is divided
into smaller equal periodic payments. For example, a bond with a par value
of 100 and a coupon rate of 6% paid quarterly would pay coupon payments
of 0.06 Г— 100 = 60/4 = 15 four times per year.
2. Match each bond type in the left column with a description in the right
column.
вҖӢ

A. Fixed-coupon bond

I. The difference between its issuance price and par
value at maturity represents a cumulative interest payment at maturity.

B. Floating-rate note

II. Usually involves uniform payments that occur at
monthly, quarterly, semi-annual, or annual intervals.

C. Zero-coupon bond

III. Involves interest payments that reset periodically
based on market factors.
вҖӢ

Solution:
A. II is correct. Fixed-coupon bonds usually involve uniform payments
that occur at monthly, quarterly, semi-annual, or annual intervals.
B. III is correct. Floating-rate notes (FRNs) involve interest payments that
reset periodically based on market factors.

Introduction

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.

C. I is correct. Zero-coupon bonds are typically issued at a discount to
par; the difference between the issuance price and par value represents
a cumulative interest payment at maturity.
3. The coupon rate for a floating rate note (FRN) is composed of a market
reference rate and:
A. a credit rating.
B. an issuer-specific spread.
C. The yield on a fixed-rate benchmark bond.
Solution:
B is correct. An FRN coupon rate comprises a market reference rate (MRR)
and an issuer-specific spread that is usually constant and set at the time
of issuance, while the MRR resets periodically based on market factors.
As the MRR changes, the FRN coupon rate and interest payment change
accordingly.
A is incorrect. While the issuerвҖҷs credit rating may be a determinant of an
FRNвҖҷs spread over the MRR, a credit rating is a letter-grade assessment of
credit risk and is not directly involved in the calculation of the coupon rate.
C is incorrect. The yield on a fixed-rate benchmark bond would reflect topdown factors that determine interest rates, such as real growth and expected
inflation, which are already considered in the MRR.
4. A sovereign bond is usually a safer investment than a corporate bond of
similar maturity issued within a country because:
A. corporate bonds are subject to inflation risk.
B. sovereign bonds are backed by taxation and fiscal power of the issuing
government.
C. sovereign bonds are secured by high-quality collateral, such as property and equipment.
Solution:
B is correct. Sovereign bonds are backed by a national governmentвҖҷs taxation and fiscal power and thus usually represent the highest-credit-quality
bonds in each geographic market.
A is incorrect because sovereign bonds, unless specifically indexed to inflation, are also subject to inflation risk.
C is incorrect because sovereign bonds are typically not secured by collateral; this is more commonly a feature of corporate bonds and asset-backed
securities.
5. Which of the following is the appropriate order of claims in liquidation, by
type of bond, in order of highest to lowest?
A. Junior, senior secured, senior unsecured
B. Senior unsecured, senior secured, junior
C. Senior secured, senior unsecured, junior
Solution:
C is correct. Senior secured debts would be the highest-priority claims to
be satisfied. Senior unsecured debts would be the next to receive allocations
of the liquidated asset value, and junior debts would be the lowest-priority
claims to be satisfied.

5

6

Learning Module 1

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
Fixed-Income Instrument Features

6. Describe the purpose of a pari passu clause in a bond indenture.
Solution:

A pari passu (вҖңequal footingвҖқ) clause ensures that a debt obligation is treated
the same as the borrowerвҖҷs other senior debt instruments.

2

FEATURES OF FIXED-INCOME SECURITIES
describe the features of a fixed-income security
Fixed-income instruments are debt instruments, such as loans and bonds. Loans
are debt instruments formed and governed by a private agreement usually between
an individual or company and a financial intermediary, such as a bank. Bonds or
fixed-income securities are more standardized contractual agreements between larger
issuers and investors. A bond issuer borrows money most often to fund operations or
capital expenditures. Bond investors are lenders who provide funds to the issuer in
exchange for interest payments and future repayment of principal. While corporate
issuers tend to have, at most, one or two types of equity securities outstanding, they
often have many types of debt obligations outstanding, each with distinct features,
such as time to maturity, seniority, and currency.
WHICH LIABILITIES ARE FIXED-INCOME INSTRUMENTS?
Earlier modules in corporate issuers and financial statement analysis discussed
the balance sheets of corporate issuers composed of assets and the liabilities
and equity that finance them. Liabilities are broadly defined by accounting
standards as present obligations to transfer economic resources as a result of
past events. This definition encompasses many types of obligations, including
amounts that an issuer owes to suppliers, customers, employees, governments,
retirees, lessors, and so on.
Not all liabilities are fixed-income instruments (or вҖңdebtвҖқ), but all fixed-income instruments are liabilities. In these modules on fixed income, from the
perspective of a corporate issuer, we are focused only on loans and bonds:
instruments that can be settled in cash and for which the counterparty is an
investor or a bank. Other liabilities, particularly leases and pension obligations,
share some characteristics with fixed-income instruments but are outside the
scope of these modules.

Short-Term
Assets

Accounts Payable
(obligations to
suppliers)

Lease Liability
(obligations to
lessors)

Short-Term
Liabilities

Accrued Payroll
(obligations to
employees)

Pension Liability
(obligations to
retirees)

Long-Term
Liabilities

Deferred Revenue
(obligations to
customers)

Loan
(obligations to
banks)

Equity

Taxes Payable
(obligations to
governments)

Bonds
(obligations to
investors)

Long-Term
Assets

Fixed-Income
Instruments

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
Features of Fixed-Income Securities

Note that government issuers tend to be financed by bonds, not by loans,
though some exceptions existвҖ”for example, loans from supranational organizations such as the International Monetary Fund (IMF).
The committed periodic cash flows of a bond distinguish it from equity securities.
Exhibit 1 shows the cash flows of a fixed-rate bond issued by Bright Wheels Automotive
(BRWA) Corporation.

Exhibit 1: BRWA Corporation Bond Cash Flows
Time
t=0

Semiannual (t)

Maturity (t = T)

BRWA
Corp

BRWA
Corp

BRWA
Corp

Principal
(par value)
paid to issuer

Bond
Investor

Periodic fixed
coupon
payment

Bond
Investor

Final coupon
payment plus
return of principal

Bond
Investor

At issuance, investors purchased the BRWA bond in exchange for cash equal to the
bond principal or the amount borrowed, which is also referred to as the bondвҖҷs par
value. On each interest payment date, BRWA commits to pay bond investors an interest or coupon payment equal to the coupon rate times the par value of the bond. For
periods shorter than a year, the annual coupon amount is divided into smaller equal
periodic payments. On the bondвҖҷs maturity date, BRWA pays the final fixed coupon
and the principal amount to investors.
The key features of each bond issue are usually summarized in a prospectus. Exhibit
2 outlines the terms of BRWA CorporationвҖҷs bond issue.

7

8

Learning Module 1

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
Fixed-Income Instrument Features

Exhibit 2: BRWA Corporation Bond: Brief Summary of Terms
Borrower liable
for all interest
and principal
payments

Periodic fixed or
variable cash
flows paid to
investors on or
before the
maturity date

A specific
bondвҖҷs ranking
among all issuer
obligations

3.2% BRWA Corporation Five-Year Notes
(The вҖңNotesвҖқ) Prospectus Summary
Issuer:

Bright Wheels Automotive Corporation

Settlement Date:

[T + 3 Business Days]

Maturity Date:

[Five Years from Settlement Date]

Principal Amount:

US$ 300 million

Interest:

3.2% fixed coupon

Interest Payment:

Commencing six months from [Settlement
Date] to be paid semiannually with final
payment on [Maturity Date]

Seniority:

The Notes are unsecured and unsubordinated
obligations of BRWA Corporation and will
rank pari passu with all other unsecured and
unsubordinated indebtedness

Business Days:

New York

Final date upon which
bond payment occurs
Amount that issuer
agrees to pay
investors on or before
the maturity date

Key bond features include the issuer, time to maturity, principal amount, coupon rate
and frequency, seniority, and contingency provisions.

Issuer
A bond issuer can be any legal entity and is liable for all interest and principal payments.
Government sector issuers include national (also termed sovereign) or local governments, supranational organizations (such as the World Bank), and quasi-government
entities (agencies owned or sponsored by governments, such as postal services or
national railways). Because sovereign bonds are backed by the taxation and fiscal
power of the issuing government, they usually represent the lowest-credit-risk bond
in each region. Private sector issuers include corporate issuers and special purpose
entities created to take ownership in such assets as loans or receivables, financed by
asset-backed securities (ABS) issued to investors, which will be discussed in detail
in later lessons.

Maturity
A bondвҖҷs maturity is the date of the final payment the issuer makes to investors, and
the tenor refers to the remaining time to maturity. Fixed-income securities with a
tenor one year or less at issuance are known as money market securities, examples
of which include government Treasury bills and commercial paper issued by corporations. Bonds with tenors longer than one year at issuance are called capital market
securities. Perpetual bonds are a less common bond type with no stated maturity.
Public sector entities were the first issuers of perpetual bonds, and current examples
include local governments and local authorities, as well as certain bonds issued by
banks to meet regulatory capital requirements. Perpetual bonds are still distinct from
equities, however, in that they have contractually defined cash flows, no voting rights,
and greater seniority in the capital structure.

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
Features of Fixed-Income Securities

AIRPORT AUTHORITY HONG KONGвҖҷS PERPETUAL BONDS
Airport Authority Hong Kong (AAHK) is a statutory body responsible for
operating and developing Hong Kong International Airport, one of the worldвҖҷs
busiest cargo airports and a major passenger hub connecting to over 200
global destinations. In late 2020, following a sharp decline in passenger volume
during the COVID-19 pandemic, AAHK announced a two-part, USD1.5 billion
perpetual bond issue to fund construction of a third runway and for general
corporate purposes. Asian and European investors demonstrated confidence in
the airportвҖҷs recovery of passenger volume, placing orders totaling more than
10Г— the offer amount.

Principal (Par or Face Value)
The principal, par value, or face value is the amount an issuer agrees to repay to
investors at maturity. In the BRWA Corporation example, the principal amount
of USD300 million is repaid at maturity, which is five years from issuance. Certain
instruments may repay the principal in equal or variable increments over time. A
common example is a mortgage loan, for which borrowers make a monthly payment
composed of both principal repayment and interest. The principal is repaid over time
and not in a lump sum at maturity.

Coupon Rate and Frequency
A bondвҖҷs interest can be paid as
в– 

a fixed coupon paid on specified dates,

в– 

a variable coupon determined and paid on specified dates, or

в– 

part of a single payment with the principal at maturity.

Fixed-coupon bond payments usually involve uniform payments at monthly, quarterly, semi-annual, or annual intervals. Corporate bonds tend to pay semiannually.
Bonds with variable interest payments are called floating-rate notes (FRNs). An
FRN coupon is determined as a combination of a market reference rate (MRR) and an
issuer-specific spread referred to as the credit spread. The MRR is a standard borrowing
or lending rate for issuers with the highest creditworthiness or lowest default risk for
different currencies and maturities. MRRs were historically determined by a poll of
lenders (Libor) but transitioned to an average of observed market transaction rates.
The credit spread is set at the time of FRN issuance, is usually constant over the
bondвҖҷs life, and is expressed in basis points (bps), or hundredths of a percentage point.
The higher an issuerвҖҷs credit quality, the lower the spread. In contrast, the MRR resets
periodically throughout the bondвҖҷs life based on market factors. As the MRR changes,
the FRN coupon rate and interest payment change accordingly.
Bonds that do not pay periodic interest and instead pay interest as part of a single
payment with principal at maturity are termed zero-coupon bonds or pure discount
bonds. Zero-coupon bonds are typically issued at a discount to par; the difference
between the issuance price and par value represents a cumulative interest payment
at maturity.

9

10

Learning Module 1

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
Fixed-Income Instrument Features

Seniority
A debt issueвҖҷs seniority or priority of repayment among all issuer obligations is an
important determinant of risk. Senior debt has priority over other debt claims in the
case of bankruptcy or liquidation. Junior debt, or subordinated debt, claims have a
lower priority than senior debt and are paid only once senior claims are satisfied. The
BRWA Corporation bonds are senior debt and would be repaid before any BRWA
subordinated debt in the event of bankruptcy.

Contingency Provisions
A contingency provision is a clause in a legal agreement that allows for an action if
an event or circumstance occurs. The most common contingency provision for bonds
involves embedded optionsвҖ”specifically, call, put, and conversion to equity options.
These resemble option contracts but cannot be traded separately from the bond itself.
However, the value of these embedded options may be established by comparing the
value of a bond with a contingency provision with that of an otherwise similar standard bond from the same issuer. The BRWA bond does not contain any contingency
provisions, but this feature will be explored in depth in later lessons.
We can use the features of a bond issue to model its cash flows. Exhibit 3 illustrates the cash flows over the life of the five-year, fixed-coupon BRWA Corporation
bond described earlier.

Exhibit 3: BRWA Corporation Bond Cash Flows
304.8
300

Investors receive
final coupon and
principal payment
at maturity

4.8

4.8

4.8

4.8

4.8

4.8

4.8

4.8

4.8

4.8

0.5

1.0

1.5

2.0

2.5

3.0

3.5

4.0

4.5

5.0

Years

BRWA Corp.
receives par
value of bond
upon issuance

300

At the time of issuance, investors purchase the bond and pay cash to BRWA Corporation
equal to the USD300 million in par value. BRWA investors receive periodic interest
payments as follows:
Annual interest expense = Bond par value Г— Coupon rate.

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
Features of Fixed-Income Securities

Annual interest expense = USD300,000,000 Г— 3.2%.
Annual interest expense = USD9,600,000.
Semiannual interest expense = USD9,600,000/2 = USD4,800,000.
At the end of the fifth year on the maturity date, BRWA Corporation pays investors
the final semiannual coupon payment plus the par value of USD300 million for a total
of USD304.8 million.

Yield Measures
Given a bondвҖҷs expected cash flows and its price, return or yield measures can be
calculated. One simple measure is the current yield (CY), equal to the bondвҖҷs annual
coupon divided by the bondвҖҷs price and expressed as a percentage. For example, if the
five-year BRWA bond were trading at a price of USD101 per USD100 in face value at
time t, its current yield would be
CYt = Annual coupont/Bond pricet = 3.2%/1.01 = 3.168%.
The current yield is analogous to the dividend yield for an equity security.
A more complex but far more common yield measure is the yield-to-maturity
(YTM), which is the internal rate of return (IRR) calculated using the bondвҖҷs price
and its expected cash flows to maturity. YTM is usually quoted as an annual rate. An
investorвҖҷs rate of return on a bond will equal the bondвҖҷs YTM at the time of purchase
as long as the investor
1. receives all promised interest and principal payments as scheduled (i.e., no
default),
2. holds the bond until maturity, and
3. reinvests all periodic cash flows at the YTM.
Notice that these are the same IRR assumptions discussed in earlier modules. If
any of these assumptions do not hold, the investorвҖҷs rate of return on the bond investment will differ from the YTM. If the five-year BRWA bond were trading at a price
of USD101 per USD100 in face value immediately after issuance, its YTM is the rate,
r, in the following equation (recall that the 3.2% coupon is paid semiannually, or 1.6
in each of 10 periods per USD100 in face value):
101 = 1.6/(1 + r)1 + 1.6/(1 + r)2 + . . . + 101.6/(1 + r)10.

r = 1.49% on a semiannual basis, or 1.49% Г— 2 = 2.98% annualized.
The YTM calculation is covered in depth in later modules.

Yield Curves
Most fixed-income issuers have many debt instruments outstanding. A useful way
of evaluating the YTM on one issue is to graph all an issuerвҖҷs debt instruments with
identical features by their YTM and times to maturity. This graphical depiction results
in a yield curve. BRWA has six bond issues outstanding, shown in Exhibit 4. The 3.2%,
five-year bond is the third point from the left.

11

12

Learning Module 1

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
Fixed-Income Instrument Features

Exhibit 4: BRWA Corporation Bond Yield Curve
Yield-to-Maturity (%)

BRWA Corporation

3.2%

5y

Maturity

In this example, the BRWA bonds with longer maturities have higher YTMs, indicating
that investors are demanding higher expected returns to compensate for higher risk
associated with longer-maturity bonds of the same issuer. A way to measure the credit
risk (one type of investment risk of fixed-income securities) for a bond is to compare
an issuerвҖҷs yield curve to that of comparable sovereign bonds, which have little or no
credit risk. Exhibit 5 shows the yield curve for BRWA bonds versus the yield curve
for comparable sovereign bonds in the United States, which are US Treasuries.

Exhibit 5: BRWA Corporation Yield Curve vs. Treasuries
Yield-to-Maturity (%)

BRWA Corporation

Government Issuer
3.2%
2.3%

5y

Maturity

The yield-to-maturity difference between the five-year BRWA bond and the five-year
US Treasury bond is 90 bps (= 3.2% вҲ’ 2.3%), which reflects compensation that investors demand for taking the additional credit risk associated with the BRWA bonds.

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
Features of Fixed-Income Securities

QUESTION SET
1. Match the fixed-income instrument type in the left column with its
description in the right column.
вҖӢ

A. Money market securities

I. Public and private bonds with a time
to maturity of greater than one year

B. Capital market securities

II. Fixed-income instruments with
maturities of less than one year, such as
commercial paper

C. Perpetual bonds

III. Bonds that have no stated maturity
date
вҖӢ

Solution:
A. II is correct. Money market securities are fixed-income instruments
with maturities of less than one year, such as commercial paper.
B. I is correct. Capital market securities are public and private bonds
with a time to maturity of greater than one year.
C. III is correct. Perpetual bonds have no stated maturity date.
2. Calculate the coupon payment on a 2.5% coupon bond with GBP100,000 par
value and a semiannual payment frequency.
Solution:

The correct answer is GBP1,250.
The annual coupon on a bond is calculated by multiplying the coupon rate
and the par value. For this bond, the coupon rate of 2.5% and par value
of GBP100,000 results in a GBP2,500 annual coupon. However, since the
payment frequency is semiannual (twice a year), each coupon payment is
GBP1,250.
3. Determine the appropriate FRN coupon and interest payable in the following example: A European corporation issues a EUR10 million FRN
that pays quarterly interest equal to the three-month MRR plus 125 bps. If
three-month MRR is вҖ“0.50%, what is the corporationвҖҷs FRN coupon interest
payable on the FRN for the period?
Solution:

The answer is EUR18,750.
An FRN coupon comprises MRR plus the issuer-specific spread.
FRN coupon = MRR + Spread.
FRN coupon = вҖ“0.50% + 1.25%.
FRN coupon = 0.75%.
Annual interest = Principal Г— FRN coupon.
Annual interest = вӮ¬10,000,000 Г— 0.75%.
Annual interest = вӮ¬75,000, or вӮ¬18,750 on a quarterly basis.

13

14

Learning Module 1

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
Fixed-Income Instrument Features

4. Fill in the blanks. The current yield is equal to a bondвҖҷs annual _____ divided
by the bondвҖҷs price expressed as a percentage. If the bondвҖҷs price were to fall,
we would expect the current yield to ____.
Solution:

The current yield is equal to a bondвҖҷs annual coupon divided by the bondвҖҷs
price expressed as a percentage. If the bondвҖҷs price were to fall, we would
expect the current yield to rise.
5. Fill in the blanks. A downward-sloping yield curve indicates that
yields-to-maturity on an issuerвҖҷs longer-term bonds are __________ than
yields-to-maturity on that issuerвҖҷs shorter-term bonds.
Solution:

A downward-sloping yield curve indicates that yields-to-maturity on an
issuerвҖҷs longer-term bonds are lower than yields-to-maturity on that issuerвҖҷs
shorter-term bonds.

3

BOND INDENTURES AND COVENANTS
describe the contents of a bond indenture and contrast affirmative
and negative covenants

Bond Indentures
Fixed-income security features outlined in the prior lesson are included in a legal
contract that describes the form of the bond, the obligations of the issuer, and the
rights of the bondholders. This legal contract is referred to as the bond indenture.
In addition to specifying a bondвҖҷs features, an indenture identifies the issuerвҖҷs sources
of repayment, any commitments made by the issuer to bondholders, as well as any
provisions that support or enhance the issuerвҖҷs ability to repay its debt in full.

Sources of Repayment
The sources of bond repayment vary among issuers and are a key factor in determining
a bondвҖҷs relative risk. For example, national governments have the sovereign right
to tax economic activity (and, in some cases, print currency), which results in their
bonds often holding the highest credit quality in a given region. Sovereign bonds in
developed markets are often considered to have no default risk and are used as the
benchmark for relative bond market risk.
Local or regional governments may either use their taxing authority as the source
of bond repayment or consider fees from infrastructure projects, such as bridges,
toll roads or public transit systems, to repay interest and principal on an associated
bond issue.
Investors in corporate bonds usually rely on the operating cash flows of the firm
as their primary source for interest and principal payments. As shown in later lessons,
investors use such factors as profitability and leverage to gauge the expected variability of corporate cash flows available to service debt. Corporate bonds for issuers of
higher credit quality are usually unsecured, which means these cash flows are the

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
Bond Indentures and Covenants

sole source of repayment, as in the earlier BRWA Corporation example. Corporate
issuers with less stable operating cash flows usually face more credit provisions and
restrictions and may offer investors a legal claim (or lien or pledge) on specific assets
as a secondary source of debt repayment in what are referred to as secured bonds.
In liquidation, the secured debtholders may receive the value of the designated assets
while unsecured debtholders would only receive any funds remaining after this allocation. A junior unsecured bondholder would be the last creditor in line to receive
the asset value of an issuer in default, because all secured debts and senior unsecured
debts would have higher-priority claims.
Investors evaluate operating cash flows as well as these secondary claims (referred
to as collateral) when assessing an issuerвҖҷs credit quality, which may include physical
assets; cash flows, such as licensing fees; or financial guarantees from a third party.
Issuers must weigh the benefit of providing these credit enhancements (lower borrowing costs) with the costs in terms of reduced operating flexibility.

Exhibit 6: Sovereign Bond and Corporate Bond Sources of Repayment
Tax
Revenues

Sovereign
Bond

Bond
Investor

Operating
Cash Flows

Unsecured
Corporate Bond

Bond
Investor

Secured
Corporate Bond

Bond
Investor

Operating
Cash Flows
Collateral
Cash Flows
or Sale

As the name suggests, the source of repayment for asset-backed securities (ABS) are
the cash flows from a group of loans or receivables owned by the special purpose
issuer. A later module will show in detail how an ABS transaction recreates an entire
capital structure of asset-based cash flow claims across investor classes with different
priority claims to these cash flows. These different classes shown in Exhibit 7 are
referred to as tranches.

Exhibit 7: Asset-Backed Security Sources of Repayment
Tranche A
Bond Investor
Loan/
Receivable
Cash Flows

Asset-Backed
Security
(ABS)

Tranche B
Bond Investor
Tranche C
Bond Investor

15

16

Learning Module 1

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
Fixed-Income Instrument Features

For example, Tranche A notes might have a priority claim to periodic cash flows followed by Tranche B. Tranche C investors would receive cash flows only after Tranche
A and B investors.

Bond Covenants
Bondholders have limited influence over an issuer as compared to equity investors,
who have voting rights. One exception to this is legally enforceable rules or bond
covenants that borrowers and lenders agree on at the time a bond is issued or a
loan is made. Affirmative covenants specify what issuers are required to do, whereas
negative covenants specify what issuers are prohibited from doing.
Affirmative covenants are typically administrative in nature. For example, common
affirmative covenants include the use of proceeds from the bond issue, the provision
of timely financial reports, and permitting bondholders to redeem their bonds at a
premium to par if the issuer is acquired.
Other affirmative covenant examples include a pari passu clause (or вҖңequal footingвҖқ clause), which ensures that a debt obligation is treated the same as the borrowerвҖҷs
other debt obligations with similar seniority. A cross-default clause specifies that
borrowers are considered in default if they default on another debt obligation. These
covenants typically neither impose additional costs on an issuer nor materially constrain the issuerвҖҷs discretion in operating its business.
Exhibit 8 provides the covenants faced by BRWA Corporation for its senior unsecured bonds from the prior example.

Exhibit 8: BRWA Bond: Brief Summary of Indenture Terms
3.2% BRWA Corporation Five-Year Notes
Prospectus Summary (Continued)
Issuer:

Bright Wheels Automotive Corporation

Use of Proceeds:

We will use the net proceeds from the Notes for general corporate
purposes

Seniority:

The Notes are unsecured and unsubordinated obligations of BRWA
Corporation and will rank pari passu with all other unsecured and
unsubordinated indebtedness.

Limitation on
Liens:

The Indenture restricts our ability to pledge some of our assets as
security for other debt.

Limitation on Sales
and Leasebacks:
Merger and
Consolidation:

The Indenture prohibits us from selling and leasing back any plant
for a term of more than [X] years
The Indenture prohibits us from merging or consolidating with
any company or selling all or substantially all of our assets to any
company if after doing so the surviving company would violate the
limitation on liens or sales and leasebacks discussed above.

As a senior unsecured issuer, BRWAвҖҷs use of proceeds is broadly defined, and it faces
few negative covenants limiting its business decisions. The limitations of liens and sale
and leaseback, as well as merger and consolidation restrictions, all protect bondholders
from the dilution of their claims as senior bondholders.
Issuers of lower credit quality often face additional covenants established to protect bondholders if an issuerвҖҷs financial condition deteriorates. For example, consider
the case of Vivivyu Inc., a digital media corporation that has issued senior secured
callable bonds, as shown in Exhibit 9.

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
Bond Indentures and Covenants

Exhibit 9: Vivivyu Inc. Summary of Bond and Indenture Terms
6.5% Vivivyu Inc. (VIVU) Seven-Year Callable Notes (The вҖңNotesвҖқ)
Prospectus Summary
Issuer:

Vivivyu Incorporated

Settlement Date:
Maturity Date:

Principal Amount:
Interest:

[T + 3 Business Days]
[Seven Years from Settlement Date]
USD400 million
6.5% fixed coupon

Interest Payment:

Starting six months from [Settlement Date] to be paid semiannually with final payment on [Maturity Date]

Seniority:

The Notes are secured and unsubordinated obligations of VIVU
and rank pari passu with all other secured and unsubordinated
debt

Call Provision:

The Issuer may redeem some or all of the Notes on any Business
Day before [Maturity] starting three years after [Settlement]
based on the Call Price Schedule as a percentage of the Principal
Amount plus accrued interest

Call Price Schedule:

103.25% [Three to Four Years after Settlement]
102.50% [Four to Five Years after Settlement]
101.75% [Five to Six Years after Settlement]
101.00% [Six to Seven Years after Settlement]

In the case of Vivivyu, bondholders are protected by a set of covenants which closely
monitor certain financial ratios and restrict its ability to pay dividends to shareholders,
repurchase shares, and / or take on additional debt unless tighter financial restrictions
are met under what is referred to as an incurrence test (see Exhibit 10).

Exhibit 10: VIVU Bond: Brief Summary of Indenture Terms
6.5% Vivivyu Inc. (VIVU) Seven-Year Callable Notes (The вҖңNotesвҖқ)
Prospectus Summary (continued)
Issuer:

Vivivyu Incorporated

Transaction Security:

The Notes are secured by a pledge of certain assets as identified in the Indenture.

Restriction on
Additional Debt:

Unless the Incurrence Test is met, the Issuer shall not issue
additional debt unless it is (a) subordinated or (b) a working
capital facility up to 20% of the Principal Amount of Notes
outstanding.

Restrictions on
Dividends and
Distributions:

The Issuer shall not (i) pay any dividend in respect of its
shares, (ii) repurchase any of its own shares, or (iii) reduce
share capital with repayment to shareholders unless the
Incurrence Test is met.

Debt Restriction Test:

Issuer must maintain (a) Net Interest Bearing Debt to
EBITDA not greater than 5.00Г— and (b) Interest Coverage
Ratio greater than 2.50Г— for each financial reporting period.

Incurrence Test:

Test is met if issuer has (a) Net Interest Bearing Debt to
EBITDA not greater than 4.50Г— and (b) Interest Coverage
Ratio greater than 3.0Г— for each financial reporting period.

17

18

Learning Module 1

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
Fixed-Income Instrument Features

Other negative covenants include limitations on investments, the disposal of assets,
or issuance of debt senior to existing obligations under what is known as a negative
pledge clause. Negative covenants seek to ensure that an issuer maintains the ability to make interest and principal payments. Highly restrictive covenants may not
be in the bondholdersвҖҷ best interest if they force an issuer to default when it may be
avoided. For example, strict debt restrictions may prevent an issuer from raising new
funds necessary to meet contractual obligations. Covenant violations can provide
bondholders recourse in several possible ways, including a change in financial terms,
such as an increase in a bondвҖҷs interest rate, accelerated debt payments, or termination
of the debt agreement.
QUESTION SET
1. Explain the difference in the sources of repayment for a secured and
an unsecured corporate bond.
Solution:

The sole source of repayment for unsecured corporate bonds is typically operating cash flows of the issuer, while secured corporate bonds also include
specific assets as a secondary source of debt repayment in addition to the
issuerвҖҷs operating cash flows.
2. Describe the source of repayment for asset-backed securities.
Solution:

The source of repayment for asset-backed securities are cash flows from the
group of loans or receivables owned by the special purpose issuer.
3. Match the bond covenant type in the left column with the examples in the
right column.
вҖӢ

A. Affirmative Covenant

I. Additional Debt Restriction

B. Negative Covenant

II. Cross-Default Clause
III. Interest Coverage Minimum
вҖӢ

Solution:
A. II is correct. A cross-default clause specifies that borrowers are considered in default if they default on another debt obligation and is an
affirmative covenant.
B. I and III are correct. An additional debt restriction clause limits an
increase in issuer debt and is a negative covenant. An interest coverage
minimum limits the amount of leverage relative to an issuerвҖҷs operating income or EBITDA.
4. Describe the difference between affirmative and negative bond covenants.
Solution:

Affirmative covenants specify what issuers are required to do, whereas negative covenants specify what issuers are prohibited from doing.
5. Fill in the blanks. Covenant violations provide bondholders recourse in
several possible ways, including a change in _________ terms, such as an

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
Bond Indentures and Covenants

increase in a bondвҖҷs interest rate or security, ___________ debt payments, or
___________ of the debt agreement.
Solution:

Covenant violations provide bondholders recourse in several possible ways,
including a change in financial terms, such as an increase in a bondвҖҷs interest rate or security, accelerated debt payments, or termination of the debt
agreement.

19

20

Learning Module 1

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
Fixed-Income Instrument Features

PRACTICE PROBLEMS
The following information relates to questions
1-5
Antelas AG is a German emerging technology company focused on manufacturing process design. The firm has developed several valuable patents related
to micromachining and metal 3D printing technology and derives its revenue
through licensing royalties and consultation services. Antelas recently issued the
following debt instrument:
Antelas AG Four-Year Floating-Rate Notes (The вҖңNotesвҖқ)
Prospectus Summary
Issuer:

Settlement Date:
Maturity Date:

Principal Amount:
Interest:

Antelas AG
[T + 5 Business Days]
[Four Years from Settlement Date]
EUR250 million
MRR plus 250 bps p.a.

Interest Payment:

Commencing three months from [Settlement Date] to be paid quarterly with final payment on [Maturity Date]

Seniority:

The Notes are secured and unsubordinated obligations of Antelas
AG and will rank pari passu with all other secured and unsubordinated indebtedness.

Business Days:

Frankfurt

1. вҖңFour yearsвҖқ and вҖңMRR plus 250 bps p.a.вҖқ refer, respectively, to which bond features as of the settlement date?
A. Time to maturity and coupon rate
B. Coupon frequency and current yield
C. Time to maturity and contingency provision
2. Which of the following statements best describes the source(s) of repayment for
the Antelas AG floating-rate notes?
A. Since the notes are secured (or backed) by Antelas AGвҖҷs assets, the
floating-rate notes would be considered asset-backed securities.
B. The Antelas AG notes rely on the operating cash flows of the firm as their
sole source for interest and principal payments.
C. The Antelas AG notes rely on the operating cash flows of the firm as their
primary source for interest and principal payments.
3. Antelas AGвҖҷs issuer-specific credit spread rises by 25 bps p.a. one year after the
FRN issuance. Which of the following best describes how Antelas AGвҖҷs FRN cou-

Practice Problems

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.

pon would change as a result?
A. Antelas AGвҖҷs FRN coupon payment to investors will immediately increase
by 25 bps p.a.
B. Antelas AGвҖҷs FRN coupon payment to investors will increase by 25 bps p.a.
but will not become effective until the next full debt coupon period begins.
C. Antelas AGвҖҷs FRN coupon will remain unchanged.
4. Calculate the value of AntelasвҖҷs payment to bondholders on the maturity date if
the MRR is 0.25% p.a. for the final interest period.
A. EUR1,718,750
B. EUR251,718,750
C. EUR256,875,000
5. Antelas decides to raise new secured, unsubordinated debt. Which of the following best describes the priority of payments between the issuerвҖҷs new debt and its
existing debt?
A. Because the Antelas AG notes have a pari passu (or вҖңequal footingвҖқ) clause,
this debt obligation will be treated the same as any other secured, unsubordinated debt from this borrower.
B. Because the existing debt was issued earlier, it would receive priority over
the new debt in terms of the payment of interest and principal.
C. We do not have enough information to answer this question; the necessary
information would be provided in the indenture for new secured, unsubordinated notes.

21

22

Learning Module 1

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
Fixed-Income Instrument Features

SOLUTIONS
1. A is correct. The notes mature (the date Antelas AG will pay the final coupon and
principal amount) four years after the trade settlement date, and the coupon rate
is variable, determined by the MRR plus a fixed 250 bp spread.
2. C is correct. Secured corporate bonds rely on the operating cash flows of the firm
as their primary source for interest and principal payments and a legal claim on
assets as a secondary source of payment.
A is incorrect because asset-backed securities (ABS) are issued by
special-purpose entities created to take ownership in loans or receivables, the
cash flows from which are used to pay interest and principal to investors.
B is incorrect because it describes unsecured, not secured, corporate debt.
3. C is correct. For the Antelas AG FRN, the spread is fixed at 250 bps and the coupon will only change with changes in the MRR.
4. B is correct. On the maturity date, Antelas AG pays investors the final FRN coupon payment plus the bondвҖҷs principal amount. The FRN coupon comprises MRR
plus the issuer-specific spread.
в– 
в– 

в– 

в– 
в– 

FRN coupon rate: MRR plus spread, or 0.25% + 2.50%= 2.75%

Annual interest expense: Principal Г— FRN coupon, or вӮ¬EUR250,000,000 Г—
2.75% = EUR6,875,000

Quarterly interest expense: Annual interest expense/4, or EUR6,875,000/4
= EUR1,718,750
Principal Amount: EUR250,000,000

Total Payment = EUR250,000,000 + EUR1,718,750 = 251,718,750

5. A is correct. Antelas AGвҖҷs existing secured, unsubordinated debt has a pari passu
(or вҖңequal footingвҖқ) clause, which ensures that this debt obligation will be treated
the same as any other secured, unsubordinated debt from this borrower.
B is incorrect because the priority of payments is unrelated to the timing of
issuance.
C is incorrect because the pari passu clause ensures equal footing for similar new
debt.

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.

LEARNING MODULE

2

Fixed-Income Cash Flows and Types
LEARNING OUTCOMES
Mastery

The candidate should be able to:
describe common cash flow structures of fixed-income instruments
and contrast cash flow contingency provisions that benefit issuers
and investors
describe how legal, regulatory, and tax considerations affect the
issuance and trading of fixed-income securities

INTRODUCTION
A fixed-income instrumentвҖҷs cash flows are determined by its features. In this module,
we discuss common fixed-income instrument cash flow structures and their implications for issuers and investors. The moduleвҖҷs final lesson discusses the legal, regulatory,
and tax considerations across jurisdictions faced by fixed-income issuers and investors.
LEARNING MODULE OVERVIEW
в– 

In contrast to standard bullet bonds with full principal repayment at maturity, amortizing bonds have a payment schedule
that involves early repayment of principal. Sinking funds and waterfall
structures represent special cases of amortizing bonds.

в– 

Other coupon payment structures include index-linked bonds that
offer payments adjusted for changes in price indices and bonds with
step-up coupons, with coupons that increase by specific amounts in
the future based on a schedule or subject to specific provisions.

в– 

Fixed-income contingency provisions include call, put, and conversion
features. A call feature grants an issuer the right to buy bonds back
early at a fixed price, while a put feature grants an investor the right to
sell bonds to the issuer at a fixed price prior to maturity. Convertible
bonds grant investors the right to convert the bond into shares of the
issuerвҖҷs stock at a pre-determined price.

1

24

Learning Module 2

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
Fixed-Income Cash Flows and Types

в– 

Bonds can be classified as domestic, foreign, or Eurobonds. Domestic
bonds are those issued in a country by an issuer incorporated in that
same country, while foreign bonds are issued by entities incorporated
elsewhere.

в– 

Eurobonds are issued internationally in a currency different from that
countryвҖҷs domestic currency (e.g. US dollar bonds issued in London)
and are subject to fewer listing, disclosure, and regulatory requirements than domestic or foreign bonds.

в– 

Bond interest earned by an investor is usually taxed as ordinary
income, although some bonds offer tax advantages. Some countries
also apply a capital gains tax. Specific tax provisions often apply for
bonds issued at a discount or purchased at a premium.

LEARNING MODULE SELF-ASSESSMENT
These initial questions are intended to help you gauge your current level
of understanding of this learning module.
1. An investor that is more sensitive to an issuerвҖҷs credit risk than to reinvesting risk would most likely invest in a:
A. bullet bond.
B. partially amortizing bond.
C. fully amortizing bond.
Solution:
C is correct. Investors receive higher near-term cash flows on amortizing
debt versus bullet bonds and face lower credit risk because the borrowerвҖҷs
liability is reduced over time. However, investors also face the risk of reinvesting the higher near-term cash flows at prevailing market interest rates,
which can fluctuate. This effect is larger for fully amortizing bonds versus
partially amortizing bonds.
2. Match the term in the left column with its description in the right column.
вҖӢ

A. Bullet bond

I. A bond with a fixed periodic payment schedule
that reduces the bondвҖҷs outstanding principal to a
portion of the principal to be repaid on the maturity date

B. Partially amortizing bond

II. A bond with a coupon rate that increases by
specified margins at one or more specified dates

C. Step-up coupon bond

III. A bond that pays its face value and final interest
payment at maturity
вҖӢ

Solution:
A. III is correct. A bullet bond pays 100% of its face value plus a final
interest payment at the bondвҖҷs maturity.
B. I is correct. A bond characterized by a fixed periodic payment schedule that reduces the bondвҖҷs outstanding principal to a portion of the
principal to be repaid on the maturity date is known as a partially
amortizing bond.

Introduction

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.

C. II is correct. A bond with a coupon rate that increases by specified
margins at one or more specified dates is known as a step-up coupon
bond.
3. A call provision embedded in a fixed-income security:
A. is a benefit to the issuer.
B. gives the bondholder the right but not an obligation to sell the bond.
C. grants the bondholder some degree of inflation protection.
Solution:
A is correct. A call provision gives the issuer the right to redeem all or part
of the bond at a pre-determined price on specified dates. It is a benefit to the
issuer because if market interest rates fall, the issuer can replace the callable bond with one with a lower interest rate. It also gives the issuer added
flexibility if it has excess cash or wishes to change its capital structure in the
future.
B is incorrect. This describes a putable bond, not a callable bond. If a callable bond is called, the bondholder is obliged to sell it to the issuer according to the specified terms.
C is incorrect. A call provision does not grant the bondholder inflation protection. A call would be exercised by the issuer if interest rates fall.
4. A put provision embedded in a fixed-income security:
A. is a benefit to the bondholders.
B. leads to a lower value compared to a bullet bond.
C. increases the likelihood that its issuer will be acquired.
Solution:
A is correct. A put provision gives bondholders the right to sell the bonds
back to the issuer at a pre-determined price on specified dates. The put provision is a benefit to bondholders because it can protect them from the risk
of the price of the bond falling from, for example, rising interest rates.
B is incorrect. As put provisions are beneficial to investors, putable bonds
are priced at a premium, not a discount, relative to option-free counterparts.
C is incorrect. Put provisions can deter acquirers because the exercise of
putable bonds results in an immediate claim on cash, making the acquisition
more expensive. Issuing bonds with put provisions is a strategy employed by
some firms to deter unfriendly takeovers known as a вҖңpoison puts.вҖқ
5. Match the term in the left column with its description in the right column.
вҖӢ

A. Eurobond

I. A bond issued outside the jurisdiction of any single country

B. Global bond

II. A bond issued simultaneously in the Eurobond market
and in at least one domestic bond market
вҖӢ

Solution:
A. I is correct. Eurobonds are issued outside the jurisdiction of any single
country, are usually unsecured, and may be denominated in any currency, including the issuerвҖҷs domestic currency.

25

26

Learning Module 2

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
Fixed-Income Cash Flows and Types

B. II is correct. A global bond is a bond issued simultaneously in the
Eurobond market and in at least one domestic bond market, ensuring
sufficient demand for large bond issues and access to all fixed-income
investors regardless of location.
6. Compared to a bond with an original issue discount (OID) tax provision, an
otherwise identical bond without this provision would most likely have:
A. lower taxes due at maturity.
B. the same taxes due at maturity.
C. higher taxes due at maturity.
Solution:
C is correct. Under the OID tax provision, the investor will recognize
a prorated portion of the OID as taxable income each year and pay no
capital gains tax upon maturity. Investors without an OID tax provision
will recognize no taxable income until maturity, upon which they will face
capital gains tax on the OID (provided there is capital gains tax in their
jurisdiction).

2

FIXED-INCOME CASH FLOW STRUCTURES
describe common cash flow structures of fixed-income instruments
and contrast cash flow contingency provisions that benefit issuers
and investors
The most common bond cash flow structure is that of a standard fixed-coupon bond,
often referred to as a bullet bond. The bond issuer receives the principal at settlement, makes periodic, fixed coupon payments, and repays the principal at maturity.
Most government and corporate issuers use bullet bonds as their primary means of
debt financing, and investors often prefer the associated fixed income stream and set
maturity to fund known cash flows. Exhibit 1 shows the bullet bond structure of the
five-year, USD300 million, 3.2% semiannual coupon BRWA bond introduced in the
prior module.

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
Fixed-Income Cash Flow Structures

Exhibit 1: BRWA Corporation Bullet Bond Cash Flows
304.8
300

Investors receive
final coupon and
principal payment
at maturity

4.8

4.8

4.8

4.8

4.8

4.8

4.8

4.8

4.8

4.8

0.5

1.0

1.5

2.0

2.5

3.0

3.5

4.0

4.5

5.0

Years

BRWA Corp.
receives par
value of bond
upon issuance

300
Principal

Interest

Some instruments, including most loans, have cash flow structures that differ from
that of the bullet bond. For example, some instruments have principal repayments
distributed over the life of the instrument. In the case of interest payments, most loans
pay periodic interest at a rate that changes as short-term market rates change, while
others change based on credit or other provisions. Finally, zero-coupon bonds are sold
at a discount with no cash flow during their life until repayment of par at maturity.
These bonds pay no periodic interest, but the difference between the discount price
and par at maturity represents a cumulative interest payment at maturity.

Amortizing Debt
Fixed-income instruments that periodically retire a portion of principal outstanding
prior to maturity offer a borrower the ability to spread payments more evenly over the
life of the instrument. Examples include commercial or residential real estate mortgage
loans. Investors receive higher near-term cash flows on this amortizing debt relative
to bullet bonds and face lower credit risk because the borrowerвҖҷs liability is reduced
over time. However, investors also face the risk of reinvesting the higher cash flows at
prevailing market interest rates over the life of the instrument, which could decline.
Let us consider the opposite of the BRWA five-year bullet bond, a fully amortizing
loan for the same term and at the same interest rate. As shown in Exhibit 2, principal
amortization begins on the first interest payment date and continues through maturity.

27

28

Learning Module 2

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
Fixed-Income Cash Flows and Types

Exhibit 2: BRWA Corporation Fully Amortizing Loan Cash Flows
Investors receive a $32.7 payment equal to the
sum of interest and principal payments

27.9 28.4 28.8 29.3 29.7 30.2 30.7 31.2 31.7 32.2

4.8

0.5

4.4

1.0

3.9

3.4

3.0

2.5

2.0

1.5

1.0

0.5

1.5

2.0

2.5

3.0

3.5

4.0

4.5

5.0

Years

Issuer receives
par value of bond
upon issuance

300
Principal

Interest

Note that while the first interest payment, USD4.8, is identical to that of the bullet
bond, instead of interest-only coupons each period followed by the final coupon and
principal at maturity, investors receive a uniform USD32.7 periodic cash flow until
maturity, which in the first period includes USD27.9 of principal amortization. Over
time, the interest portion of the payment declines while the principal repayment
portion increases.
Let us assume instead that BRWA issues a bond with the same maturity and at
the same rate but repays a portion of the principal each period, with a final lump sum
payment (or balloon payment) at maturity equal to half of the principal amount.
The interest and principal payments for this partially amortizing bond are shown
in Exhibit 3.

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
Fixed-Income Cash Flow Structures

Exhibit 3: BRWA Corporation Partially Amortizing Bond Cash Flows
168.75
150

Investors receive an $18.75 payment equal
to the sum of interest and partial
principal amortization

14.0 14.2 14.4 14.6 14.9 15.1 15.3 15.6 15.8 16.1
4.8

4.6

4.4

4.1

3.9

3.6

3.4

3.2

2.9

0.5

1.0

1.5

2.0

2.5

3.0

3.5

4.0

4.5

5.0

Investors receive final $18.75
payment and a balloon principal
payment at maturity

Years

Issuer receives
par value of bond
upon issuance

300
Principal

Interest

The cash flows for the partially amortizing bond combine elements of the bullet and
fully amortizing examples. Cash flow schedules from the perspective of the investor
for the bullet bond, partially amortizing bond, and fully amortizing loan with the same
principal, maturity, and fixed coupon rate are shown in Exhibit 4.

Exhibit 4: Investor Perspective: BRWA Bond/Loan Cash Flow Summary (USD
millions)
Year
0

Bullet Bond

Partially Amortizing Bond

Fully Amortizing Loan

вҖ“300

вҖ“300

вҖ“300

0.5

4.8

18.75

32.7

1

4.8

18.75

32.7

1.5

4.8

18.75

32.7

2

4.8

18.75

32.7

2.5

4.8

18.75

32.7

3

4.8

18.75

32.7

3.5

4.8

18.75

32.7

4

4.8

18.75

32.7

4.5

4.8

18.75

32.7

5

304.8

168.75

32.7

The fully amortizing loan has a level semiannual payment equal to the sum of interest and principal repayment. We may calculate the periodic payment (A) as follows:
r Г— Principal
1 вҲ’ вҖӢ1 + r вҖӢ вҖӢ

вҖӢ,вҖӢ	
	вҖӢA = _
вҖӢ (
) вҲ’N

(1)

29

30

Learning Module 2

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
Fixed-Income Cash Flows and Types

where
A = Periodic payment amount
r = Market interest rate per period
Principal = Principal amount of loan or bond
N = Number of payment periods
The fully amortized BRWA bond is a five-year, 3.2% semiannual coupon bond with a
par value of USD300 million. The periodic payment is calculated as follows, in millions:
r Г— Principal
1 вҲ’ вҖӢ1 + r вҖӢ вҖӢ

	вҖӢA = _
вҖӢ (
вҖӢ. вҖӢ
) вҲ’N
r = 3.2%/2 = 1.6% on a semiannual basis.
Principal = USD300 million.
N = 5 Г— 2 = 10 semiannual periods.
0.016 Г— USD300
1 вҲ’ вҖӢ 1.016 вҖӢ вҖӢ

	вҖӢA = ____________
вҖӢвҖҜвҖҜ
вҖҜвҖҜ
вҖӢ.вҖӢ
(
) вҲ’10
A = USD32.70.
Therefore, the semiannual payment is a constant USD32.70, as shown in Exhibit 2,
but the principal and interest amounts vary each period as follows:
в– 

First semiannual interest payment: USD300 Г— 3.2%/2 = USD4.80.

в– 

Initial principal repayment: USD32.7 вҲ’ USD4.8 = USD27.90.

в– 

Outstanding principal after first period: USD300 вҲ’ USD27.90 = USD272.10.

The USD272.10 outstanding principal becomes the basis for the calculation of the
interest and principal payment in the second period:
в– 

Second semiannual interest payment: USD272.10 Г— 3.2%/2 = USD4.35.

в– 

Second principal repayment: USD32.70 вҲ’ USD4.35 = 28.35.

в– 

Outstanding principal after second period: USD272.10 вҲ’ USD28.35 =
USD243.75.

Note that the periodic payment is constant, but over time, the interest payment
decreases while the principal repayment increases.
The partially amortized bond in Exhibit 3 with the USD150 balloon principal
payment paid at maturity combines two elements:
1. a five-year fully amortizing loan with USD150 notional and
2. a USD150 balloon payment at maturity.
The sum of the present values of these two elements is equal to the bond price
of USD300. The present value (PV) of the USD150 balloon payment is calculated as
USD150
вҖӢ 1.016 вҖӢ вҖӢ

PV of balloon payment вҖӢ= вҖӢ_
вҖӢ = USD127.98.вҖӢ
(
) 10
Subtracting the present value of the balloon payment from the USD300 price of the
bond gives us USD172 in principal repayment to amortize over 10 semiannual periods
to leave a remaining principal of USD150 at maturity. Using this USD172 principal
amount, we can compute the periodic payment amount as
0.016вҖӢ(USD172)вҖӢ
1 вҲ’ вҖӢ 1.016 вҖӢ вҖӢ

	вҖӢA = ____________
вҖӢвҖҜвҖҜ
вҖҜвҖҜ
вҖӢ = USD18.75.вҖӢ
(
) вҲ’10

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
Fixed-Income Cash Flow Structures

The periodic payment is USD18.75, as shown in Exhibit 3. The final semiannual
payment of USD168.75 is the sum of the final constant USD18.75 payment and the
outstanding principal amount of USD150. Since the principal amount is not fully
amortized, interest payments are higher for the partially amortized bond in each
period than for the fully amortized bond, except the first period when they are equal.
Commercial and residential mortgages are common examples of fully amortizing
loans. Mortgage borrowers usually prefer the constant cash flows of fully amortizing
loans, because they are better able to match rental or lease income in the case of
commercial borrowers or personal income for households. In the United States, these
mortgage loans often back bonds known as mortgage-backed securities with cash
flows similar to those of the loan shown in Example 1.
EXAMPLE 1

30-Year Fixed-Rate Residential Mortgage Loan
A borrower agrees to purchase a home and enters into a mortgage loan with a
financial intermediary based on the following terms:
Home price: USD500,000
Loan amount: USD400,000
Annual interest rate: 3.50%
Loan term: 360 months
Noting that the borrowerвҖҷs monthly interest rate is 0.29167% (= 3.50%/12),
we can use Equation 1 to calculate the homeownerвҖҷs monthly mortgage payment
on the USD400,000 loan as follows:
0.0029167вҖӢ(USD400, 000)вҖӢ
1 вҲ’ вҖӢ 1.0029167 вҖӢ вҖӢ

вҖҜвҖҜ
вҖӢ = USD1, 796.18.вҖӢ
	вҖӢA = __________________
вҖӢвҖҜвҖҜ
(
) вҲ’360
As in the case of BRWA, we can calculate the interest and principal components of each periodic payment, with the first five and final five monthly
payments of the 30-year mortgage shown below.
вҖӢ

Month
1

Total
Monthly
Payment

Monthly
Interest
Payment

Monthly Principal
Payment

Remaining
Principal

USD1,796.18

USD1,166.67

USD629.51

USD399,370.49

2

USD1,796.18

USD1,164.83

USD631.35

USD398,739.14

3

USD1,796.18

USD1,162.99

USD633.19

USD398,105.95

4

USD1,796.18

USD1,161.14

USD635.04

USD397,470.91

5

USD1,796.18

USD1,159.29

USD636.89

USD396,834.03

356

USD1,796.18

USD25.97

USD1,770.21

USD7,132.63

357

USD1,796.18

USD20.80

USD1,775.38

USD5,357.26

358

USD1,796.18

USD15.63

USD1,780.55

USD3,576.70

359

USD1,796.18

USD10.43

USD1,785.75

USD1,790.96

360

USD1,796.18

USD5.22

USD1,790.96

USD0.00

вҖӢ

31

32

Learning Module 2

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
Fixed-Income Cash Flows and Types

Two additional bond amortization arrangements commonly encountered are
sinking funds, used primarily by government and some corporate issuers, and
waterfall structures, which are commonly used in asset-backed securities (ABS) and
mortgage-backed securities (MBS).
A sinking fund arrangement is used by issuers to periodically retire a bondвҖҷs principal outstanding. The term sinking fund refers to an issuerвҖҷs plans to set aside funds
over time in an escrow account to retire the bond early based on terms agreed upon
issuance. For example, an issuer may direct the bond trustee to redeem a predetermined
principal amount selected from among investors at random. Alternatively, the issuer
may have the right to repurchase bonds prior to maturity at a predetermined fixed
price under a contingency feature addressed later in this lesson. Like amortization,
sinking funds reduce credit risk while increasing reinvestment risk due to a reduction
of principal outstanding prior to maturity.
Another structure for principal repayment is a waterfall. This approach is used to
determine the timing of cash flows to investor classes with different priority claims to
the same cash flows. In the most common form, interest or coupon payments are paid
to all classes with no preference, but the repayment of principal occurs sequentially
so that the most senior investor class with the highest ranking in the capital structure
receives principal payments first, followed by the second-highest ranked investors
once the most senior class has been fully repaid. Exhibit 5 shows a typical waterfall
structure based on the three-tranche example from the prior module.

Exhibit 5: Typical ABS Waterfall Structure
Tranche A
Bond Investor
Asset-Backed
Security (ABS)

First to receive
principal

Tranche B
Bond Investor

Principal received
only when Tranche A
is fully repaid

Tranche C
Bond Investor

Principal received
only when Tranches
A & B are fully repaid

Payment shortfalls are borne by the more junior tranches since the senior tranches
are paid first, so Tranche A faces the lowest credit risk, followed by Tranches B and C.

Variable Interest Debt
Some bonds and most loans have variable interest payments, calculated using a market
reference rate (MRR) and a credit spread. Financial intermediaries, such as banks,
prefer floating-rate loan assets since they match their variable-rate liabilities, such as
deposits. Loans or floating-rate notes (FRN) are also attractive to investors seeking
to benefit from rising interest rates.
Recall that a variable-rate loan or FRN coupon consists of a periodically resetting
MRR plus an issuer-specific credit spread.
FRN coupon = MRR + Credit spread.
For example, practice problems in the prior module highlighted the four-year, EUR250
million Antelas AG FRN issued at an interest rate of MRR + 250 bps p.a. paid quarterly. Exhibit 6 shows the final four Antelas AG FRN cash flows, including principal
repayment at maturity similar to a fixed-rate bullet bond.

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
Fixed-Income Cash Flow Structures

Exhibit 6: Antelas AG FRN Cash Flows
Note Principal Amount (EUR)

250,000,000

Credit Spread over MRR

2.50%

Coupon
Rate

Quarterly
Interest Payment

вҖ“0.50%

2.00%

1,250,000

0.15%

2.65%

1,656,250

15

0.25%

2.75%

1,718,750

16

0.50%

3.00%

1,875,000

Quarter

MRR

13
14

Principal
Payment

250,000,000

For example, in Quarter 15, the coupon rate is 2.75% (= 0.25% + 2.50%) and the quarterly interest payment is calculated as follows:
(2.75% Г— EUR250,000,000)/4 = EUR1,718,750.
Investors face less interest rate risk with variable-rate instruments because coupon payments adjust with interest rates, unlike fixed-coupon bonds. However, like
fixed-coupon bonds, variable-rate instruments still have credit risk: If an issuerвҖҷs
likelihood of missing payments increases, investors will seek a higher yield as compensation for lower credit quality, causing their price to fall, irrespective of any changes
in the MRR.
In addition to changing cash flows based on variations in MRR, other adjustment
mechanisms exist, which can be either predetermined or tied to an event. In the
case of predetermined adjustments, a bond coupon increases by specified margins at
specified dates. These bonds are referred to as step-up bonds and are used to protect
investors against rising rates and, in some cases, to provide an incentive for issuers
to take advantage of a contingency provision, as addressed later. An example of cash
flow changes based on an event are higher coupons in the event of a deterioration in
an issuerвҖҷs credit quality. This provides investors with greater comfort that they will
be compensated for adverse credit changes and allows less creditworthy issuers to
obtain debt financing for longer and/or at lower spreads than may be possible at a
fixed coupon. This is most common with leveraged loans, or loans to issuers of lower
credit quality. Coupon changes may also be linked to financial covenants or credit
ratings, which are sometimes used in what are referred to as credit-linked notes.
For example, say that Antelas AG experiences a decline in its credit quality as the
FRN matures. It must therefore adequately address investor credit concerns by revising
the terms of its debt. Exhibit 7 shows how Antelas might achieve this by entering a
loan agreement arranged by a bank with a credit spread that adjusts based on leverage
and interest coverage ratios.

Exhibit 7: Antelas AG Leveraged Loan Term Sheet
Antelas AG Five-Year Leveraged Loan
Term Sheet
Issuer:

Settlement Date:
Maturity Date:

Principal Amount:
Interest:

Antelas AG
[T + 3 Business Days]
[Five Years from Settlement Date]
EUR250 million
MRR Plus Credit Spread

33

34

Learning Module 2

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
Fixed-Income Cash Flows and Types

Antelas AG Five-Year Leveraged Loan
Term Sheet
Interest Payment:

Commencing three months from [Settlement Date] to be paid
quarterly with final payment on [Maturity Date]

Credit Spread:

Based on IssuerвҖҷs Total Leverage Ratio (TLR) at the end of each
quarter as follows:
325 bps p.a. if TLR вүҘ 3.5Г—
300 bps p.a. if 3.5Г— > TLR вүҘ 3.0Г—
275 bps p.a. if 3.0Г— > TLR вүҘ 2.5Г—
250 bps p.a. if TLR вүӨ 2.5Г—

Seniority:

The Loan is a secured, unsubordinated obligation of Antelas AG.

Debt Restriction Test:

Issuer must maintain (a) Total Leverage Ratio (Net Interest
Bearing Debt to EBITDA) not greater than 5.00Г— and (b) Interest
Coverage Ratio greater than 2.50Г— for each financial reporting
period.

Antelas maintains its current credit spread only if its total leverage ratio remains
below 2.5Г—, with a higher spread if leverage increases. An issuer concerned about
potential cash flow problems in the future might seek to add a payment-in-kind (PIK)
feature to a loan or bond. PIK features allow an issuer to pay periodic interest in the
form of an increase in the bond or loan principal outstanding rather than as a cash
payment. This feature is most frequently used by firms with relatively high reliance
on debt financing and are usually associated with a higher interest rate to compensate
investors assuming greater principal risk.
As the following box example shows, the use of variable bond coupon provisions
is not limited to issuers with credit quality or cash flow issues.
PUBLIC POWER CORPORATION (PPC) SUSTAINABILITY-LINKED BOND
Fixed-income markets have rapidly adapted to the growing importance of
environmental, social, and governance (ESG) factors among issuers and investors. For example, green bonds are fixed-income instruments usually issued
by governments or private companies that are created to fund projects with a
positive environmental impact.
Public Power Corporation (PPC) is a publicly traded company that is 51%
owned by the Greek government and is GreeceвҖҷs largest electricity utility. PPC
announced plans to close most of its coal power capacity to sharply reduce
carbon emissions, increase renewable energy production, and modernize and
partially privatize its power grid. In order to attract a broader investor base to
provide debt financing for its ambitious plans, PPC issued sustainability-linked
bonds in early 2021 based on the following terms:
вҖӢ

Public Power Corporation Five-Year Sustainability-Linked Bonds
Key Terms
Issuer:

Settlement Date:

Public Power Corporation S.A.
March 18, 2021

Maturity Date:

March 30, 2026

Interest:

3.875% p.a.

Principal Amount: EUR775 million
Step-Up Margin:
Step-Up Event:

50 bps p.a. if a Step-Up Event occurs
Issuer fails to reduce CO2 emissions by 40% by December
2022 versus 2019 base year

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
Fixed-Income Cash Flow Structures

Public Power Corporation Five-Year Sustainability-Linked Bonds
Key Terms
Interest Payment:

Commencing 9/30/21 to be paid semiannually with final
payment on the Maturity Date

Seniority:

The Notes are senior unsecured obligations of the Issuer
вҖӢ

PPCвҖҷs sustainability-linked bonds were the first of its kind for a European
high-yield issuer. The CO2-related step-up margin feature in PPCвҖҷs bonds was
a significant factor in attracting widespread investor demand in a transaction
that exceeded the original EUR500 million planned size.
Index-linked bonds have interest and/or principal payments linked to a specified
index. Although a bond may be linked to any variable, in practice, inflation-linked
bonds (sometimes referred to as linkers) tied to a broad consumer price index are
by far the most common type of index-linked bonds. The fixed interest and principal
payments of a standard bond are nominal cash flows whose purchasing power declines
with inflation. The interest rate a bondholder receives net of inflation is the real interest rate, which is approximately equal to the nominal interest rate minus the rate of
inflation. Investors often use inflation-linked bonds to protect against rising prices
by receiving inflation-adjusted cash flows. Most inflation-linked bonds are issued by
sovereign governments. Examples include Treasury Inflation-Protected Securities
(TIPS) in the United States, which address investor demand for inflation-indexed cash
flows. There is also growing demand for inflation-linked emerging market bonds due
to investor concerns over high inflation. The following example demonstrates how
TIPS cash flows are adjusted for inflation.
EXAMPLE 2

TIPS Cash Flow
An investor purchases TIPS with the following terms:
вҖӢ

Principal amount:

USD115,000,000

Semiannual coupon:

1.00% p.a.

Time to maturity:

9.5 years

Inflation protection:

Based on the change in the Consumer Price Index for All
Urban Consumers: All Items in U.S. City Average, Not
Seasonally Adjusted (CPI)
вҖӢ

If the CPI rises from 265.00 to 267.25 over the next semiannual interest
period, the next coupon payment is calculated as follows:
в– 

Inflation adjustment: (267.25 вҲ’ 265) / 265 = 0.849%.

в– 

Inflation-adjusted principal = Principal amount Г— (1 + Inflation
adjustment)
= USD115,976,350 = USD115,000,000 Г— 1.00849.

в– 

Annual interest expense = Coupon rate Г— Inflation-adjusted principal,
or
= 1.00% Г— USD115,976,350 = USD1,159,764.

в– 

Semiannual interest paid = USD1,159,764/2 = USD579,882.

35

36

Learning Module 2

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
Fixed-Income Cash Flows and Types

TIPS, which have a periodic principal adjustment based on a price index, are an
example of a capital-indexed bond. This approach protects the real value of debt
principal. Capital-indexed bonds are also issued by other sovereign governments,
including those of Australia, Canada, and the United Kingdom. Note that while deflation causes the principal to decline over time, investors usually receive the greater of
the inflation-adjusted principal or par at maturity.
Unlike capital-indexed bonds, interest-indexed bonds pay a fixed nominal
principal amount at maturity. Only the coupon is index linked and pays an inflation
adjustment. These bonds are essentially an FRN in which the MRR is the rate of
inflation. Interest-indexed bonds are more commonly issued by private financial
intermediaries than by governments.

Zero-Coupon Structures
Zero-coupon bonds repay principal at maturity but have no coupon payments.
Zero-coupon bonds are often referred to as discount bonds, since they are priced
below par if interest rates are positive. An investorвҖҷs sole source of return is the difference between the price paid and the principal, which represents a cumulative interest
payment at maturity. Zero-coupon bonds are commonly issued by governments with
tenors less than 12 months. As sovereign interest rates fell to (or below) zero in the
wake of global financial crisis in 2008, zero-coupon bonds also became more common
at longer maturities. Zero-coupon bonds are also created by financial intermediaries
that sell individual interest or principal payments separated (or stripped) from sovereign bullet bonds.
Zero-coupon bonds are useful for funding fixed future obligations. If interest
rates fall, a standard fixed-rate bond may fall short of meeting the obligation because
falling interest rates reduce reinvestment income (in other words, the investorвҖҷs rate
of return will fall below the original YTM because the reinvestment assumption at
the YTM does not hold). Since zero-coupon bonds require no coupon reinvestment,
investors in these bonds do not face this risk.

Deferred Coupon Structures
Deferred coupon bonds pay no interest for the first few years and have a higher
coupon paid later through maturity. Issuers of deferred coupon bonds usually seek to
conserve cash immediately following the bond issue, which may indicate lower credit
quality or that the issuer is financing a construction project that does not generate
income until completion. Similar to zero-coupon bonds, which may be considered an
extreme form of deferred coupon bond, deferred coupon bonds are typically priced at
a discount to par since the higher coupon is not usually sufficient to offset the forgone
interest in earlier periods.
Exhibit 8 summarizes the common types of cash flow structures for fixed-income
instruments.

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
Fixed-Income Cash Flow Structures

Exhibit 8: Fixed-Income Instrument Cash Flow Structures

Standard, Fixed-Rate Bond
(вҖқbullet bondвҖқ)

Amortizing Principal

вҖ“ Fixed coupon rate
вҖ“ Coupons are interest only
вҖ“ Par value or principal paid at maturity
вҖ“ Example: most long-term corporate
and government bonds
вҖ“ Often uniform periodic payments,
composed of both interest and
principal
вҖ“ Principal paid over life of the
instrument
вҖ“ Example: mortgage loans

Variable Interest

вҖ“ Cash flows change based on specified
market interest rate, index, inflation
rate, etc.
вҖ“ Example: floating rate notes, most
bank loans

Zero Coupon

вҖ“ Fixed 0% coupon rate
вҖ“ Par value or principal paid at maturity
вҖ“ Typically sold at a discount
вҖ“ Example: short-term government
bonds

QUESTION SET
1. Compared to a bullet bond, an otherwise identical amortizing bond
would most likely have:
A. lower credit risk.
B. lower reinvestment risk.
C. lower near-term cash flows.
Solution:
A is correct. Compared to a bullet bond, an otherwise identical amortizing
bond would have early principal repayments each period instead of all principal paid at maturity, lowering exposure to the issuers credit risk. However,
larger periodic payments increase reinvestment risk.
2. Calculate the periodic payment and the interest and principal components
of the first payment for a fully amortizing bond based on the following:
в– 

Loan amount: USD10,000,000

в– 

Annual interest rate: 2.75%

в– 

Loan term: 10 semiannual periods (5 years)

Solution:
Using Equation 1:

37

38

Learning Module 2

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
Fixed-Income Cash Flows and Types

r Г— Principal
1 вҲ’ вҖӢ1 + r вҖӢ вҖӢ

	вҖӢA = _
вҖӢ (
вҖӢ ,вҖӢ
) вҲ’N
where
r = 1.375% (= 2.75%/2)
Principal = USD10,000,000
N = 10
Solve for the periodic payment (A) as follows:
вҖӢ(0.01375)вҖӢГ— вҖӢ(10, 000, 000)вҖӢ
1 вҲ’ вҖӢ 1.01375 вҖӢ вҖӢ

вҖҜвҖҜ
вҖӢ.вҖӢ
	вҖӢUSD1, 077, 174 = ___________________
вҖӢвҖҜвҖҜ
(
) вҲ’10
The initial USD1,077,174 periodic payment comprises the following:
в– 

Initial interest payment: USD10,000,000 Г— 1.375% = USD137,500.

в– 

Initial principal repayment: USD1,077,174 вҲ’ USD137,500 =
USD939,674.

3. Describe how a decrease in the consumer price index would affect the next
coupon payment of a capital-indexed inflation-linked bond.
Solution:

The principal of capital-indexed inflation-linked bonds is adjusted using a
price index, with coupon payments calculated using a fixed coupon rate and
the adjusted principal. A decrease in the consumer price index (or deflation)
will cause the principal of a capital-indexed inflation-linked bond to be adjusted downward in the next period and result in a lower coupon payment.
4. Match the term in the left column with its description in the right column.
вҖӢ

A. Payment-in-kind

I. Coupon is based on a market reference rate plus a
spread.

B. Floating-rate note

II. Interest coupon may be paid by increasing the principal.

C. Step-up coupon

III. Coupon increases by specified margins at specified
dates.
вҖӢ

Solution:
A. II is correct. A payment-in-kind feature allows an issuer to pay a bond
or loan interest coupon by increasing principal.
B. I is correct. A floating-rate note coupon is based on a market reference
rate plus a spread.
C. III is correct. A step-up coupon feature involves a coupon that
increases by specified margins at specified dates.

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
Fixed-Income Contingency Provisions

FIXED-INCOME CONTINGENCY PROVISIONS
describe common cash flow structures of fixed-income instruments
and contrast cash flow contingency provisions that benefit issuers
and investors
A contingency provision is a clause in a legal agreement that allows for an action if an
event or circumstance occurs. The most common contingency provisions for bonds
involve the rightвҖ”but not the obligationвҖ”for an issuer or the bondholders to take
an action specified in an indenture. These bond contingency provisions are often
referred to as embedded options because they resemble option contracts but cannot
be traded separately from the bond itself. The value of these embedded options may be
established by comparing the value of a bond with a contingency provision with that
of a bond from the same issuer without the provision. The most common bonds with
contingency provisions include callable bonds, putable bonds, and convertible bonds.

Callable Bonds
An issuer of a callable bond has the right to redeem (or вҖңcallвҖқ) all or part of the bond
prior to the specified maturity date. An issuer considering callable versus non-callable
bonds usually seeks the flexibility to refinance debt if market interest rates were to
fall. Fixed-price calls grant an issuer the right to buy back the bond at a predetermined price in the future, as shown in Exhibit 9 for the Vivivyu Inc. bonds that were
introduced in the prior module.

Exhibit 9: Vivivyu (VIVU) Callable Bond Terms
6.5% Vivivyu Inc. (VIVU) Seven-Year Callable Notes (the вҖңNotesвҖқ) Prospectus Summary
Issuer:

Settlement Date:
Maturity Date:

Principal Amount:
Interest:

Vivivyu Incorporated
[T + 3 Business Days]
[Seven Years from Settlement Date]
USD400 million
6.5% fixed coupon

Interest Payment:

Starting six months from [Settlement Date] to be paid semiannually with final payment on [Maturity Date]

Seniority:

The Notes are secured and unsubordinated obligations of VIVU
and rank pari passu with all other secured and unsubordinated
debt.

Call Provision:

The Issuer may redeem some or all of the Notes on any Business
Day before [Maturity] starting three years after [Settlement]
based on the Call Price Schedule as a percentage of the Principal
Amount plus accrued interest.

Call Price Schedule:

103.25% [Three to Four Years after Settlement]
102.50% [Four to Five Years after Settlement]
101.75% [Five to Six Years after Settlement]
101.00% [Six to Seven Years after Settlement]

39

3

40

Learning Module 2

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
Fixed-Income Cash Flows and Types

Callable bonds typically specify a period over which the call feature cannot be used,
known as a call protection period. During the call period, the period in which the
call feature may be used, a schedule specifies the call price, or fixed price payable to
bondholders if the issuer calls the bond.
For example, the VIVU bond may not be called for the first three years but during
the following year may be called at a price of USD103.25 per USD100 in par value.
VIVU has the right to call the bond during the final four years at a fixed price that
declines over time. Investors face reinvestment risk starting in year three when the bond
can be called, as well as limited bond price appreciation beyond the fixed call price.
The value of the call feature depends on the relationship between the YTM and the
coupon of the bond. If the YTM rises above the coupon rate, there is little incentive for
the issuer to use the call feature. The YTM provides an estimate of refinancing costs,
which in this case exceeds the existing coupon. Therefore, the callable bond behaves
much like a non-callable equivalent bond with respect to price movements due to
interest rate changes. However, as a callable bondвҖҷs YTM falls below its coupon rate,
its price is effectively capped at the fixed call price, while the price of a non-callable
bond will continue to rise. Investors expect to be compensated on callable bonds with
a higher yield versus a similar non-callable bond given the uncertain maturity and
limited price appreciation, known as call risk.
Some bonds have a call feature, different from the fixed-price call, under which
the issuer compensates investors to buy bonds back known as a make-whole call.
Make-whole calls are most common among highly rated bond issues and offer issuers
greater flexibility to repurchase debt than purchases in the market. However, this provision usually requires an issuer to pay bondholders a high price based on the YTM
of a sovereign bond of similar maturity. Because this is usually well above the bondвҖҷs
current market price, make-whole calls are rarely executed and have little economic
impact on issuers or investors.

Putable Bonds
A put provision gives bondholders the right to sell the bond back to the issuer at a
pre-determined price on specified dates. The put price is usually the par value of the
bond. Putable bonds benefit bondholders by guaranteeing a pre-specified selling
price at the redemption dates. If interest rates rise after issuance and bond prices fall,
bondholders can sell or вҖңputвҖқ the bond back to the issuer and reinvest the proceeds
at higher market interest rates. The issuer will then be forced to refinance its debt
earlier than planned at higher yields.
Since a put provision has value to bondholders, the price of a putable bond will
be above the price of an otherwise similar non-putable bond. The yield on a bond
with a put provision must therefore be lower than the yield on an otherwise similar
non-putable bond. The lower yield compensates the issuer for the value of the put
option to the investor.
If a putable bondвҖҷs YTM is less than its coupon rate (so the price is higher than
the put price), the put feature is less valuable, and the putable bond behaves like an
option-free equivalent bond with respect to interest rate changes. However, if the
putable bondвҖҷs YTM increases above its coupon rate, the put price serves as a price
floor for the bond.

Convertible Bonds
A convertible bond is a debt instrument with a contingency provision related to the
issuerвҖҷs outstanding common equity. It grants bondholders the right to exchange the
issuerвҖҷs bond for a number of its common shares in the future at an effective price
per share known as the conversion price. The conversion feature rises in value to

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
Fixed-Income Contingency Provisions

investors as the share price appreciates. Rather than a right to retire debt early in the
case of callable and putable bonds, if exercised, the convertible feature replaces debt
with equity.
Exhibit 10 shows a convertible bond for ZTG BioTech S.p.a., a publicly traded
Italian company.

Exhibit 10: ZTG BioTech S.p.a. Convertible Bond Terms
1.25% ZTG Biotech (ZTGB) Five-Year Convertible Notes (the вҖңNotesвҖқ)
Term Sheet
Issuer:

ZTG Biotech S.p.a.

Settlement Date:

[T + 3 Business Days]

Maturity Date:

Five Years from Settlement Date unless the Notes are redeemed
earlier in a Conversion

Principal Amount:

EUR300 million

Interest:

1.25% fixed coupon to be paid annually starting One Year from
the Settlement Date with the final coupon paid at Maturity

Seniority:

The Notes are an unsecured obligation of ZTGB and rank pari
passu with other unsecured debt

Conversion Provision:

An Investor has, at its sole option, the right to convert a portion
or the full sum of the Principal Amount, or any part outstanding at any time at the Conversion Price during the Conversion
Period

Current Share Price:

EUR28.00 per ZTGB common equity share

Conversion Price:

Conversion Period:

EUR42.00 per ZTGB common equity share
Any Business Day starting One Year from the Settlement Date
through the Maturity Date

The 1.25% annual coupon on the ZTGB convertible bond is well below the YTM investors would expect for a standard ZTGB bond of the same maturity. Bondholders are
often willing to accept a yield-to-maturity that is very low (or even zero) in exchange
for conversion rights. ZTGB bond investors have the right to exchange debt for ZTGB
common stock at a price of EUR42.00 per share, which represents a 50% premium
over the current ZTGB price of EUR28.00 per share [= (42.00 вҲ’ 28.00)/28.00]. The
conversion ratio represents the number of common shares a bond may be converted
into for a specific par value:
Conversion ratio = Convertible bond par value/Conversion price.

(2)

For example, if the ZTGB bond is traded in EUR1,000 face value units,
в– 

the conversion ratio is equal to EUR1,000/EUR42, or 23.81, and

в– 

an owner of one EUR1,000 unit of the ZTGB bond has the right to redeem
the bond for 23.81 shares of ZTGB stock during the conversion period.

One way to estimate the value of the conversion feature at any time is to compare
the convertible bondвҖҷs price with its value if the bondholder were to convert the bonds
today. This conversion value is calculated as follows:
Conversion value = Conversion ratio Г— Current share price.

(3)

For example, assume that one year from ZTGBвҖҷs issuance date, the issuerвҖҷs shares are
trading at EUR35.00. A ZTGB bondholder could therefore convert one EUR1,000 unit
to a conversion value of EUR833.35 (= 23.81 Г— EUR35.00). If the convertible bond is
trading at par (or a market price of EUR1,000 per unit), the investor will prefer to hold

41

42

Learning Module 2

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
Fixed-Income Cash Flows and Types

the bond and receive interest and principal rather than convert the bond to shares. In
general, a convertible bondвҖҷs price will vary with that of the issuerвҖҷs shares. If the share
price is well below the conversion price, the convertible bondвҖҷs price will approach
that of a standard non-convertible bond. If the issuerвҖҷs share price far exceeds the
conversion price, the bondвҖҷs price will more closely track its conversion value.
The use of convertible debt is common among growth companies, which may have
limited cash flow to pay interest and repay principal but are willing to raise equity at a
higher conversion price in the future. Convertible bonds also often include additional
features, such as a call provision, allowing issuers to limit bond investor gains from
share price appreciation by redeeming bonds early.
Some issuers may issue warrants with bonds. A warrant is an вҖңattached,вҖқ rather
than embedded, option entitling the bondholder to buy the issuerвҖҷs stock at a fixed
exercise price until the expiration date. Warrants are used as a yield enhancement to
bond investors and are traded separately in financial markets, such as the Deutsche
BГ¶rse and the Hong Kong Stock Exchange.
Several European banks have issued a type of convertible bond called contingent
convertible bonds (CoCos), with contingent write-down provisions. While standard
convertibles will be converted when the share price increases, CoCos are converted
on the downside. This conversion is also not at the discretion of the investor but
happens automatically if a specified event occursвҖ”for example, if the bankвҖҷs core Tier
1 capital ratio (a measure of the bankвҖҷs proportion of core equity capital available to
absorb losses) falls below a minimum regulatory requirement. If the bank experiences
losses that reduce its equity capital below the minimum regulatory capital requirement, CoCos convert debt into equity to increase its capital and reduce the bankвҖҷs
likelihood of default. CoCos were introduced in order to limit systemic risk, or the
risk of financial system failure. For this reason, CoCos offer investors a higher yield
than otherwise similar bonds. Note that the conversion is triggered by a specific event,
the breach of certain minimum regulatory capital requirements, and not by certain
equity or debt price levels.
QUESTION SET
1. All else equal, the bond with the greatest benefit to the issuer is a
bond with:
A. no contingency provisions.
B. a fixed-price call provision.
C. a make-whole call provision.
Solution:
B is correct. Fixed-price calls grant the issuer the right to buy back the bond
at a predetermined price in the future, which is a benefit to the issuer if
interest rates fall.
A is incorrect. A bond with no contingency provisions is an option-free
bond and is not as beneficial to the issuer as a bond with a fixed-price call
provision.
C is incorrect. A make-whole call is a contingency feature under which
issuers can buy bonds back at a price usually based on the yield-to-maturity
of a sovereign bond of similar maturity plus a predetermined spread. Makewhole calls are rarely executed and have little economic impact on issuers or
investors.

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
Fixed-Income Contingency Provisions

2. Callable and putable bond prices with the same coupon rate will behave
most like an option-free equivalent bond when their YTMs are, respectively:
A. above the coupon rate and below the coupon rate.
B. below the coupon rate and above the coupon rate.
C. both near the coupon rate.
Solution:
A is correct. If a callable bondвҖҷs YTM rises above its coupon rate, the call
feature is less valuable and a callable bond behaves much like a non-callable bond with respect to price movements due to interest rate changes.
If a putable bondвҖҷs YTM is less than its coupon rate, the put feature is less
valuable and the putable bondвҖҷs price behaves like an option-free equivalent
bond with respect to interest rate changes.
B is incorrect. This is the reverse of the correct relationship.
C is incorrect. If their YTMs are both near the coupon rate, both bonds will
be near their price limits where the call and put features would be exercised.
Their price changes would be lower in magnitude relative to a non-callable
bond.
3. A convertible bond will closely track its conversion value if the issuerвҖҷs share
price is:
A. below the conversion price.
B. equal to the conversion price.
C. above the conversion price.
Solution:
C is correct. In general, a convertible bondвҖҷs price will vary with that of the
issuerвҖҷs shares. If the issuerвҖҷs share price far exceeds the conversion price,
the bondвҖҷs price will more closely track its conversion value.
A is incorrect. If the share price is well below the conversion price, the convertible bondвҖҷs price will approach that of a non-convertible bond.
B is incorrect. In this case, the convertible bond would have a mix of price
properties between that of a non-convertible bond and a convertible bond.
4. Match each description in the right column with the correct bond in the left
column.
вҖӢ

A. Convertible bond

I. Conversion occurs automatically

B. Contingent convertible (CoCo)
bond

II. Conversion occurs at the discretion of
the investor
III. More likely to convert if share price
increases
IV. More likely to convert if share price
decreases
вҖӢ

Solution:
A. II and III are correct. A standard convertible bond grants the right to
redeem a bond for an issuerвҖҷs equity, occurs at the discretion of the
investor, and is more likely if the issuerвҖҷs share price increases.

43

44

Learning Module 2

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
Fixed-Income Cash Flows and Types

B. I and IV are correct. Contingent convertible (CoCo) bonds are convertible on the downside and occur automatically if a specified event
occurs, such as a decline in bank capital below a regulatory minimum
level.
5. An issuer that would like to conserve near-term cash outflows would most
likely issue a:
A. putable bond.
B. callable bond.
C. convertible bond.
Solution:
C is correct. All else equal, an issuer would have the lowest interest payments on a convertible bond. Bondholders are often willing to accept a
yield-to-maturity that is very low (or even zero) in exchange for conversion
rights. Putable bonds offer lower yields than callable bonds because the put
option is a benefit to the bondholder while the call option is a benefit to the
issuer. However, the yields on callable and putable bonds are high compared
to yields on convertibles.

4

LEGAL, REGULATORY, AND TAX CONSIDERATIONS
describe how legal, regulatory, and tax considerations affect the
issuance and trading of fixed-income securities
Fixed-income securities are subject to different legal and regulatory requirements
depending on where they are issued and traded, as well as who holds them. Based on
the jurisdictions of the issuer and the issuance, a bond can be classified as a domestic,
foreign, or Eurobond. This classification has legal, tax, and regulatory implications
for issuers and investors.

Legal and Regulatory Considerations
Bonds issued by entities incorporated in the same country are called domestic bonds,
whereas bonds issued by entities incorporated in another country are called foreign
bonds. Domestic bond markets vary widely across emerging and developed markets,
and private and public issuers borrow outside the domestic market for various reasons. Corporate issuers often match the currency of their bond financing cash flows
with that of their foreign operations using foreign bonds. Emerging market sovereign
governments typically issue bonds in major foreign currencies to attract a broader set
of investors and to diversify their investor base beyond the domestic bond market. In
order to establish itself as a center for Islamic finance and attract shariвҖҷa-compliant
investors, the UK government issued a sukuk, as described below.
UK SOVEREIGN SUKUK ISSUANCE
Sukuk are fixed-income instruments developed in accordance with Islamic law or
shariвҖҷa, which prohibits the payment of interest and financing of non-shariвҖҷa-compliant sectors, such as alcohol or gambling. Instead of periodic interest, sukuk

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
Legal, Regulatory, and Tax Considerations

pay investors a periodic rental cash flow (or profit rate) from underlying assets,
against which the investment company issuing the securities has an ownership
claim for the life of the security.
Sukuk issuers were historically concentrated in predominately Muslim countries, including supranational entities, such as the Islamic Development Bank;
sovereign issuers, including the Republic of Turkey; and corporate issuers, such
as Saudi Aramco. In 2014, the United Kingdom became the first sovereign sukuk
issuer outside the Muslim world with a GBP200 million, five-year sukuk issuance listed on the London Stock Exchange. These British poundвҖ“denominated
sukuk were issued at a profit rate equivalent to the yield-to-maturity on a UK
government benchmark security with a similar maturity, and the sukuk were
backed by assets directly owned by the UK central government.
In smaller emerging markets with less financial intermediation (frontier markets),
domestic bond issuance in frontier markets usually comprises domestic sovereign bonds
and bonds of local financial intermediaries, such as banks. Corporate debt financing
usually takes the form of a bank loan in these markets, and investors are limited to
indirect fixed-income exposure to corporate issuers via bank bond purchases. Frontier
market sovereign governments access local bond markets and use international bond
markets to fund external debt in foreign currencies. For example, RomaniaвҖҷs domestic
bond market, denominated in the Romanian leu (RON), is limited in scope, while
the Romanian government often issues debt in international bond markets. More
established domestic bond markets in emerging markets may include state-owned or
state-controlled enterprises and producers operating in a dominant domestic industry,
such as basic commodities. Since many emerging market bonds are denominated in a
restricted domestic currency with varying degrees of liquidity, the sovereign government and a select few domestic issuers may issue bonds in a major foreign currency,
such as US dollars or euros. Developed market bond markets in major currencies,
in contrast, reflect a high degree of both financial intermediation and specialization,
attracting issuers from other jurisdictions and investors seeking returns in liquid
markets denominated in freely floating currencies. Multinational corporate issuers
may access several domestic bond markets to meet their funding needs. Recall the
earlier example of BRWA CorporationвҖҷs five-year US dollar fixed-rate bonds. Since
BRWA is a US-based corporation issuing bonds denominated in US dollars in the
United States, these bonds are considered domestic. If BRWA or a foreign subsidiary
were to issue euro-denominated bonds in Germany or yuan-denominated bonds in
China, these bonds would be considered foreign.
The Eurobond market was created in the 1960s primarily to bypass the legal,
regulatory, and tax constraints imposed on bond issuers and investors, particularly
in the United States. Bonds issued and traded in this cross-border market are called
Eurobonds, and they are usually named for the currency in which they are denominated, such as Eurodollar and Euroyen bonds, or euro-denominated Eurobonds for
the euro.
Eurobonds are issued outside the jurisdiction of any single country, are usually
unsecured, and may be denominated in any currency, including the issuerвҖҷs domestic
currency. They are usually underwritten by a group of financial intermediaries from
different jurisdictions and mostly sold to investors in Europe, the Middle East, and
Asia. Eurobonds denominated in US dollars cannot be sold to US investors at the
time of issue because they are not registered with the US Securities and Exchange
Commission (SEC), with an exception for large qualified institutional investors. In
the past, Eurobonds typically were bearer bonds, meaning that the trustee did not
keep records of who owned the bonds; only the clearing system knew who the bond
owners were. Eurobonds, domestic bonds, and foreign bonds are now registered
bonds for which ownership is recorded by either name or serial number.

45

46

Learning Module 2

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
Fixed-Income Cash Flows and Types

A global bond is a bond issued simultaneously in the Eurobond market and in
at least one domestic bond market, ensuring sufficient demand and access to all
fixed-income investors regardless of location. For example, the World Bank is a regular
issuer of global bonds. Many market participants refer to foreign bonds, Eurobonds,
and global bonds as international bonds, as opposed to domestic bonds.
For example, Exhibit 11 shows the terms of RomaniaвҖҷs first ever 30-year
euro-denominated bond issued in 2019.

Exhibit 11: 2019 Romanian EUR1.95 Billion, 30-Year Issuance
4.625% Romania Ministry of Finance Bonds
Brief Summary of Terms
Issuer:

Romania (Ministry of Finance)

Settlement Date:

April 3, 2019

Maturity Date:

April 3, 2049

Principal Amount:

EUR1.95 billion

Interest:

4.625% fixed annual coupon

Issuance Price:

99.488

Issuance Spread:

411.4 bps versus 1.25% Federal Republic of Germany bond
maturing 8/15/48

Issuance and Trading:

Eurobond
US Private Placement under Rule 144A
DTC/Euroclear/Clearstream

Seniority:

Senior Unsecured

Exchanges:

Luxembourg

Note that the Romanian sovereign bonds were available to both Eurobond investors
and investors in the United States under a private placement provision (Rule 144A)
that limits bond sales to certain qualified investors. The bond was priced at a 4.11%
spread over a German sovereign benchmark.
Cross-border issuance of public debt is not limited to sovereign governments. Many
federal agencies, as well as state and local governments, seek fixed-income investors
in foreign currencies and/or jurisdictions. For example, PT Indonesia Infrastructure
Finance (IIF) is a quasi-government entity established by the Republic of Indonesia
along with the World Bank and other multilateral institutions to provide infrastructure
financing and advisory in Indonesia. IIF issued US dollarвҖ“denominated Eurobonds
as outlined in Exhibit 12.

Exhibit 12: IIF US DollarвҖ“Denominated Bonds
1.50% PT Indonesia Infrastructure Finance (IIF)
Brief Summary of Terms
Issuer:

Settlement Date:
Maturity Date:

Principal Amount:
Interest:

Issuance Price:

Issuance Spread:

PT Indonesia Infrastructure Finance
[T + Five Business Days]
Five Years from Settlement Date
USD150 million
1.50% fixed semiannual
98.808
+129 bps versus current 5-year US Treasury Note

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
Legal, Regulatory, and Tax Considerations

1.50% PT Indonesia Infrastructure Finance (IIF)
Brief Summary of Terms
Issuance and Trading:

Eurobond (Medium Term Note)

Use of Proceeds:

Notes are sustainable in accordance with IIFвҖҷs sustainable
finance framework (ICMA compliant)

Seniority:

Senior Unsecured

Exchanges:

Singapore

Domestic bonds, foreign bonds, Eurobonds, and global bonds are subject to different
legal, regulatory, and tax requirements in different jurisdictions. They also have different interest payment frequencies and calculation methods affecting bond cash flows
and prices. Note, however, that the currency in which a bond is denominated has a
stronger effect on its price than where the bond is issued or traded. This is because
market interest rates have a strong influence on a bondвҖҷs price, and the market interest
rates that affect a bond are those associated with the currency in which the bond is
denominated. For example, while IIF was able to issue five-year US dollar debt with a
1.50% coupon, its domestic Indonesian rupiahвҖ“denominated bonds of a similar tenor
had a 6.97% yield-to-maturity.

Tax Considerations
The tax treatment of fixed-income securities is an important consideration for both
issuers and investors. For corporate issuers weighing the relative cost of debt and equity
capital, the tax deductibility of interest expense is an important factor in financing
decisions, as discussed in an earlier module on corporate issuers. For investors, bond
interest income is usually taxed at the ordinary income tax rate, which is typically the
same tax rate that an individual would pay on wage or salary income.
Tax treatment for investors who purchase specific types of government bonds
may also vary by jurisdiction. For example, UK citizens pay income tax on accrued
and paid interest income but are exempt from capital gains tax arising when a bond is
sold above its original purchase price. In the United States, investors in US Treasuries
pay federal income tax on interest income but are exempt from state and local tax,
while investors in US state and local government bonds (known as municipal bonds)
are often exempt from federal income tax and from the income tax of the state in
which the bonds are issued, thereby encouraging investors to purchase state and local
bonds where they reside. The tax status of bond income may also depend on where
the bond is issued and traded. For example, some domestic bonds pay their interest
net of income tax. Other bonds, including some Eurobonds, make gross interest
payments (i.e., no withholding), which may give some investors greater flexibility as
to how and where they pay taxes on this interest income.
In addition to earnings from interest, a bond investment will generate a capital gain
or loss if sold prior to maturity at a price different from the purchase price. Capital
gains or losses usually face different tax treatment from taxable income, which often
varies for long-term and short-term capital gains. For example, capital gains recognized over a year after the original bond purchase may be taxed at a lower long-term
capital gains tax rate, whereas capital gains recognized within a year of bond purchase
may be taxed as a short-term capital gain that equals the ordinary income tax rate.
Exceptions exist, and not all countries have a separate capital gains tax or a distinction
by holding period.
For bonds such as zero-coupon bonds issued at a discount, the tax status of the
original issue discount (OID) is an additional tax consideration that varies by country. The OID is the difference between the par value and the original issue price. For

47

48

Learning Module 2

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
Fixed-Income Cash Flows and Types

example, the United States includes a prorated portion of the discount in interest
income every tax year, while Japan does not. The following example illustrates the
difference in tax treatment using a zero-coupon bond.
EXAMPLE 3

Zero-Coupon Bond Tax Treatment
Assume both a US-based investor and an investor based in a tax jurisdiction
without an original discount tax provision purchase an identical zero-coupon
US Treasury security based on the following terms:
в– 

Principal amount: USD25,000,000

в– 

Time to maturity: 5 years

в– 

Issuance price: USD92.83 (per USD100 par value)

The original issue discount may be calculated as follows:
Original issue discount = Bond par value вҲ’ Issuance price.
USD1,792,500 = USD25,000,000 вҲ’ (0.9283 Г— USD25,000,000).
The USD1,792,500 original issue discount represents the interest that will
accrue to both investors over five years. Under the original issue discount tax
provision in the United States, the US-based investor will recognize a prorated
portion of the USD1,792,500 OID as taxable income each year and pay no capital
gains tax upon maturity. The non-US investor without an OID tax provision
will recognize no taxable income until maturity, upon which it will face capital
gains tax on the OID (provided there is capital gains tax in their jurisdiction).
Similarly, some jurisdictions also have tax provisions for bonds purchased at a
premium. They may allow investors to deduct a prorated portion of the amount paid in
excess of the bondвҖҷs par value from their taxable income every tax year until maturity.
This deduction may be a choice rather than a requirement, with an investor able to
decide whether to deduct a prorated portion of the premium each year or to deduct
nothing and declare a capital loss when the bond is redeemed at maturity.
QUESTION SET
1. Identify the following statement as true or false: A bondвҖҷs coupon
payment is most likely to be taxed as ordinary income.
Solution:

True. Bond interest is usually taxed at the ordinary income tax rate, which
is typically the same tax rate that an individual would pay on wage or salary
income.

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
Legal, Regulatory, and Tax Considerations

2. Match the bond type in the left column to its correct description in the right
column.
вҖӢ

A. Foreign bond

I. Bonds issued outside the jurisdiction of any single country

B. Eurobond

II. Bonds issued by entities that are incorporated in that
country

C. Domestic bond

III. Bonds sold in a country and denominated in that countryвҖҷs
currency by an entity from another country
вҖӢ

Solution:
A. III is correct. Bonds sold in a country and denominated in that countryвҖҷs currency by an entity from another country are known as foreign
bonds.
B. I is correct. Bonds issued outside the jurisdiction of any single country
are known as Eurobonds.
C. II is correct. Bonds issued by entities that are incorporated in that
country are known as domestic bonds.
3. Fill in the blanks. An unregulated bond issued in domestic currency outside
the issuerвҖҷs national borders is known as a _______________. A bond issued
simultaneously in the Eurobond market and in at least one domestic bond
market is known as a ____________ bond.
Solution:

An unregulated bond issued in domestic currency outside the issuerвҖҷs national borders is known as a Eurobond. A bond issued simultaneously in the
Eurobond market and in at least one domestic bond market is known as a
global bond.
4. Match the tax provision in the left column with the correct tax treatment in
the right column.
вҖӢ

A. Original issue discount (OID) tax
provision

I. Pay tax on interest income each year

B. No original issue discount tax
provision

II. Do not pay tax on interest income
each year
III. Pay capital gains tax at maturity
IV. Do not pay capital gains tax at
maturity
вҖӢ

Solution:
A. I and IV are correct. Investors who face an original issue discount tax
provision and purchase bonds issued at a discount must recognize a
prorated portion of the OID in taxable income each year and pay no
capital gains tax upon maturity.
B. II and III are correct. Investors in bonds issued at a discount who do
not face an OID tax provision will recognize no interest income until
maturity, when they face capital gains tax on the OID.

49

50

Learning Module 2

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
Fixed-Income Cash Flows and Types

5. A bond issued by a South African company denominated in British pounds
sold exclusively to investors who are legally domiciled in the United Kingdom would most likely be classified as:
A. foreign.
B. domestic.
C. a Eurobond.
Solution:
A is correct. Bonds sold in a country (United Kingdom) and denominated in
that countryвҖҷs currency (British pounds) by an entity from another country
(South Africa) are referred to as foreign bonds.
6. A domestic corporate issuer seeking to finance operations in a foreign market would most likely issue:
A. foreign bonds.
B. domestic bonds.
C. Treasury bonds.
Solution:
A is correct. Corporate issuers often match the currency of their bond financing cash flows with that of their foreign operations using foreign bonds.
B is incorrect. The use of domestic bonds would not match the currency
of the issuerвҖҷs foreign operations. A second possibility would be to issue a
domestic bond and then use a swap to obtain the desired foreign currency
exposure. However, this method is beyond the scope of this lesson and will
be introduced later.
C is incorrect. Treasury bonds are issued by sovereign issuers.

Practice Problems

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.

PRACTICE PROBLEMS
The following information relates to questions
1-5
Digistrype Logistics (DILO) is a Canadian firm that generates a large portion of
revenue in Europe. To finance its planned expansion into digital logistics, DILO is
seeking to issue euro-denominated bonds to institutional investors in Germany.
A term sheet for the proposed bond issue is presented below.
1.25% Digistrype Logistics (DILO) Seven-Year Convertible Notes (the вҖңNotesвҖқ)
Term Sheet
Issuer:

Settlement Date:

Digistrype Logistics Inc.
[T + 3 Business Days]

Maturity Date:

Seven Years from Settlement Date unless the Notes are redeemed
earlier in a Conversion

Principal Amount:

EUR250 million

Unit Size:

EUR1,000 per bond

Interest:

3.25% fixed coupon to be paid annually starting one Year from the
Settlement Date with the final coupon paid at Maturity

Seniority:

The Notes are an unsecured obligation of DILO and rank pari
passu with other unsecured debt.

Conversion Provision:

An Investor has, at its sole option, the right to convert a portion
or the full sum of the Principal Amount, or any part outstanding
at any time at the Conversion Price during the Conversion Period.

Current Share Price:

EUR60.00 per DILO common equity share

Conversion Price:

Conversion Period:

EUR75.00 per DILO common equity share
Any Business Day starting from the Settlement Date through the
Maturity Date

Institutional investors have expressed concern about increased credit risk due
to DigistrypeвҖҷs planned expansion outside of its core business. DigistrypeвҖҷs CFO
would prefer to fund the expansion using debt, despite an expectation of lower
market interest rates in the next few years. The CFO is also considering removing
the conversion feature because of a concern about the possible share dilution if
the bonds are converted to equity and a belief that DILO shares are significantly
undervalued.
1. Which of the following statements best describes the type of bonds to be issued
given the issuerвҖҷs country and where the bonds will be issued and traded?
A. Since Digistrype is planning to issue and sell euro-denominated bonds, its
bonds would be considered Eurobonds.
B. Since Digistrype is planning to issue and sell euro-denominated bonds to
investors in Germany, its bonds would be considered foreign bonds.
C. Since Digistrype is planning to issue and sell bonds to domestic investors in
Germany, its bonds would be considered domestic bonds.

51

52

Learning Module 2

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
Fixed-Income Cash Flows and Types

2. Which of the following modifications could Digistrype incorporate to best mitigate the investorsвҖҷ credit concerns?
A. Digistrype could consider deferred debt coupons and/or principal payments.
B. Digistrype could consider adding a call provision to its new debt.
C. Digistrype could consider accelerating principal repayment or linking debt
coupon changes to financial covenants.
3. Which of the following is the best contingency feature Digistrype could add to
mitigate its own concerns regarding lower interest rates?
A. Add a call provision to the proposed new debt.
B. Add a put provision to the proposed new debt.
C. Add a step-up coupon to the proposed new debt.
4. If DILOвҖҷs share price on the Frankfurt Stock Exchange were to rise to EUR75, the
bondвҖҷs conversion value would be:
A. EUR1,000.
B. EUR15,000.
C. EUR75,000.
5. Which of the following statements best describes the implications of removing
the conversion feature from the bond?
A. Removal of the conversion feature would likely result in a higher coupon.
B. Removal of the conversion feature would likely increase the bond price.
C. Removal of the conversion feature would likely reduce credit risk.

Solutions

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.

SOLUTIONS
1. B is correct. Digistrype, a Canadian firm, is planning to issue and sell
euro-denominated bonds to investors in Germany. Bonds issued by entities that
are incorporated in another country are called foreign bonds.
A is incorrect because Eurobonds are cross-border bonds that are not necessarily
denominated in euros.
C is incorrect because domestic bonds refer to a domestic issuer, not investor.
2. C is correct. Principal repayment acceleration, such as full amortization, partial
principal amortization, or a sinking fund arrangement, is a way to reduce credit
risk. Alternatively, Digistrype could incorporate debt coupon changes linked to
financial covenants and/or credit ratings in order to address investor concerns.
A is incorrect because it would delay rather than accelerate repayment.
B is incorrect because a call provision does not address credit concerns.
3. A is correct. A call provision gives Digistrype the right to redeem all or part of
the bond prior to maturity if interest rates decline, so new debt could be issued at
a lower cost.
B is incorrect because a put provision grants investors, not issuers, the right to
redeem debt prior to maturity but would not be exercised if interest rates fell,
because a put provision is intended to limit investorвҖҷs downside, not upside.
C is incorrect; a step-up coupon is not a contingency provision.
4. A is correct. The conversion value of a bond equals its par value if the current
share price and conversion price are equal.
Conversion ratio = Convertible bond par value/Conversion price.
We know that
Conversion value = Conversion ratio Г— Current share price.
Or, after rearranging,
Conversion ratio = Conversion value/Current share price,
which can be substituted into the lefthand side of the first equation:
Conversion value/Current share price
= Convertible bond par value/Conversion price.
If Current share price = Conversion price, then Conversion value
= Convertible bond par value.
5. A is correct. Because the conversion provision is valuable to bondholders, the
convertible bond price is higher than the price of an otherwise similar bond
without the conversion provision. Similarly, the yield on a convertible bond is
lower than the yield on an otherwise similar non-convertible bond. Thus, should
the Digistrype team elect to remove the conversion feature, it would likely have
to increase the bondвҖҷs coupon rate in order to attract investors.
B is incorrect because removal of the conversion feature would decrease, not
increase, the bond price.
C is incorrect because removal of the conversion feature would not change the
credit risk.

53

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.

LEARNING MODULE

3

Fixed-Income Issuance and Trading
LEARNING OUTCOMES
Mastery

The candidate should be able to:
describe fixed-income market segments and their issuer and investor
participants
describe types of fixed-income indexes
compare primary and secondary fixed-income markets to equity
markets

INTRODUCTION
Fixed-income instruments and markets are often categorized by issuer type, credit
quality, time to maturity, and, sometimes, additional features, such as currency, geography, and environmental, social, and governance (ESG) characteristics. Fixed-income
indexes are categorized in a similar manner and serve important functions, like the role
of equity market indexes in stock markets. Like other financial markets, fixed-income
markets are composed of primary markets in which issuers raise financing from
investors with new issues and secondary markets where investors trade existing
instruments with other investors. Given bondsвҖҷ finite maturities and other features,
there are important distinctions in fixed-income markets from the primary and secondary markets for equities.
LEARNING MODULE OVERVIEW
в– 

Fixed-income instruments and markets are typically categorized along three dimensions: issuer type (i.e., sector), credit
quality, and time to maturity.

в– 

Fixed-income investors have corresponding positions along the credit
and maturity spectrum as they seek exposures to certain risks and
attempt to match the cash flows of known future obligations.

в– 

Similar to equity market indexes, fixed-income indexes track the
returns of groups of securities that meet their inclusion criteria.
Indexes are used to evaluate market performance, benchmark the performance of investments and investment managers, and form the basis
of indexed investment strategies.

1

56

Learning Module 3

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
Fixed-Income Issuance and Trading

в– 

Fixed-income indexes can be classified as broad-based, aggregate
indexes with a vast number of constituents or narrower indexes
that focus on criteria such as issuer type, credit quality, and time to
maturity.

в– 

Primary bond markets are markets in which an issuer sells a new bond
or bonds to investors to raise financing, whereas secondary bond markets are markets in which existing bonds are traded among investors.

LEARNING MODULE SELF-ASSESSMENT
These initial questions are intended to help you gauge your current level
of understanding of this learning module.
1. Discuss two ways that an investor could seek to increase her expected return
on a fixed-income portfolio.
Solution:

Investors could increase credit risk with instruments with lower credit ratings. Second, provided that the yield curve is upward sloping, investors may
also increase expected returns with longer-term bonds.
2. Which of the following statements about fixed-income and equity indexes is
correct?
A. There is more turnover in equity indexes than in fixed-income indexes.
B. Fixed-income indexes often have more constituent securities than
equity indexes.
C. Fixed-income index constituents are typically equally weighted, while
equity index constituents are typically weighted by issuersвҖҷ market
capitalization.
Solution:
B is correct. Fixed-income indexes often have more constituent securities
than equity indexes because issuers tend to have many types of instruments outstanding, and governments issue large amounts of fixed-income
securities but not equity securities. The finite maturity of bonds and the
higher frequency of new issuance lead to far more turnover in fixed-income
indexes than in equity indexes. Fixed-income index constituents are usually
weighted by market value of debt outstanding, whereas equity indexes are
weighted by issuersвҖҷ market capitalizations.
3. The Bloomberg Barclays Global Aggregate Index includes:
A. all issuer sizes.
B. issuers in multiple currencies.
C. high-yield and unrated issuers.
Solution:
B is correct. The Bloomberg Barclays Global Aggregate Index includes
fixed-coupon capital market securities from all major issuer types in 28
developed and emerging markets that meet the inclusion criteria. However,
the index excludes high-yield and unrated debt instruments and those that
do not meet minimum issuance size.

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
Fixed-Income Segments, Issuers, and Investors

57

4. A debut issuer seeking to sell its bonds only to a select group of investors
will most likely undertake a:
A. public offering.
B. shelf registration.
C. private placement.
Solution:
C is correct. Bonds can be sold via a private placement, in which only a
select group of investors or a single investor purchases the bonds. Bonds can
also be sold in a public offering in which any member of the public may buy
the bonds. Frequent bond issuers use a shelf registration, which is updated
regularly and may be used for a range of future bond issuances.
5. A frequent bond issuer that seeks flexibility to issue bonds opportunistically
when market conditions are favorable would most likely use a:
A. reopening.
B. shelf offering.
C. private placement.
Solution:
B is correct. Frequent issuers of bonds have ready access to the bond market
and often choose issuance timing on an opportunistic basis, when market
conditions are most favorable. Frequent bond issuers use a shelf registration
or a broad, all-encompassing offering circular that is updated regularly and
may be used for a range of future bond issuances. A less common strategy
is to increase the size of an existing bond with a price significantly different
from par, which is referred to as the reopening of an existing bond. In a
private placement, only a selected investor or group of investors may buy
the bonds.

FIXED-INCOME SEGMENTS, ISSUERS, AND
INVESTORS
describe fixed-income market segments and their issuer and investor
participants
Fixed-income instruments and markets are typically categorized along three dimensions: issuer type (often known as sector), credit quality, and time to maturity.
Sometimes, instruments and markets are additionally classified by issuersвҖҷ geography,
currency, and ESG characteristics.
In contrast to equities, where issuers typically issue just one or two instruments,
issuers often have many fixed-income instruments outstanding. For example, a corporate issuer may have loans or both loans and bonds, either on a short-term basis
to finance working capital or a long-term basis for capital investment. Some large
companies also issue commercial paper, a type of short-term bond to finance working capital needs that can be collateralized by specific assets. These debt instruments

2

58

Learning Module 3

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
Fixed-Income Issuance and Trading

may be in varying currencies to hedge exposures and broaden access to investors. For
example, at the end of 2021, Apple Inc. had over 80 fixed-income instruments but a
single equity instrument (common stock) outstanding.
Exhibit 1 illustrates typical issuers and instrument types across credit and
time-to-maturity segments.

Exhibit 1: Issuers across the Credit and Maturity Spectrums: Issuers and
Instrument Types

вҖңDefault
Risk FreeвҖқ

Investment
Grade

< 1y
Short-Term

1yвҖ“10y
Intermediate-Term

> 10y
Long-Term

Treasury bills

Treasury notes

Treasury bonds

Repo
Commercial
Paper

Unsecured
Corporate
bonds

Unsecured
Corporate
bonds

ABCP

ABS

MBS

Years to
Maturity

Secured
Corporate
bonds

High
Yield

Leveraged
loans
Credit
Quality

Note: ABCP is asset-backed commercial paper.

Fixed-income investors have corresponding positions along the credit and maturity
spectrums as they seek to gain exposures to certain risks and to match the cash flows
of known future obligations. Near-term obligations and the desire for liquid cash
alternatives are often met with money market securities, while investors may assume
greater interest rate risk with long-term bonds to meet obligations further in the
future or pursue higher expected returns. Pension funds and insurance companies
with long investment time horizons favor fixed-income instruments with fixed periodic coupon cash flows and a maturity profile that matches their long-term liabilities.
Additionally, investors may take credit risk at any point on the maturity spectrum to
augment returns. Exhibit 2 illustrates common investor positions across the credit
and maturity spectrums.

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
Fixed-Income Segments, Issuers, and Investors

Exhibit 2: Investors across the Credit and Maturity Spectrums: Investors
< 1y
Short-Term

1yвҖ“10y
Intermediate-Term

Years to
Maturity

Financial intermediaries
Central banks

вҖңDefault
Risk FreeвҖқ

Pension funds

Money market
funds
Investment
Grade

> 10y
Long-Term

Corporate
issuers

Bond funds and
ETFs

Insurance
companies

Asset managers

Hedge funds

High
Yield

Distressed debt
funds
Credit
Quality

A common measure of credit quality is a credit rating. Credit ratings are letter-grade,
qualitative measures of an issuerвҖҷs ability to meet its debt obligations based on both the
probability of default and the expected loss under a default scenario. Credit ratings are
given and maintained by credit rating agencies for both short-term and long-term
debt and for issuers and specific bond issues. Two of the largest credit rating agencies
are Standard & PoorвҖҷs (S&P) and MoodyвҖҷs. Many investors are restricted to instruments
with credit ratings, with a limited percentage of their portfolio invested in unrated
instruments. Credit risk and credit ratings will be discussed in detail in later lessons.
S&P CREDIT RATINGS
S&P ratings range from AAA for the highest credit quality to D for default, with
ratings in descending order of credit quality as follows:
вҖӢ

Investment Grade

Speculative Grade or
High Yield

AAA

Extremely strong capacity to meet financial
commitments; highest rating

AA

Very strong capacity to meet financial
commitments

A

Strong capacity to meet financial commitments
but somewhat susceptible to adverse economic
conditions and changes in circumstances

BBB

Adequate capacity to meet financial commitments but more subject to adverse economic
conditions

BBB-

Considered lowest investment grade by market
participants

BB+

Considered highest speculative grade by market participants

59

60

Learning Module 3

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
Fixed-Income Issuance and Trading

BB

Less vulnerable in the near term but faces
major ongoing uncertainties to adverse business, financial, and economic conditions

B

More vulnerable to adverse business, financial,
and economic conditions but currently has the
capacity to meet financial commitments

CCC

Currently vulnerable and dependent on
favorable business, financial, and economic
conditions to meet financial commitments

CC

Highly vulnerable; default has not yet occurred
but is expected to be a virtual certainty

C

Currently highly vulnerable to non-payment,
and ultimate recovery is expected to be lower
than that of higher-rated obligations

D

Payment default on a financial commitment or
breach of an imputed promise; also used when
a bankruptcy petition has been filed or similar
action taken
вҖӢ

Source: S&P Global Ratings.

Developed market (DM) sovereign issuers usually represent the most creditworthy borrowers within a market and often carry a AAA rating. Because
investors often assume they will receive all promised interest and principal
payments on DM sovereign bonds, they comprise the вҖңdefault risk freeвҖқ category
in Exhibit 1.
Issuers rated BBB- (Baa3 on MoodyвҖҷs scale) or higher are considered investment
grade. Issuers rated BB+ (Ba1 on MoodyвҖҷs scale) or lower are referred to as high yield,
speculative grade, or junk. High-yield issuers include new issuers for which investors
are more likely to require collateral due to less stable operating cash flows, as well
as formerly investment-grade issuers whose credit quality has deteriorated since the
time of issuance (known as вҖңfallen angelsвҖқ).
The participation of issuers and investors in heterogeneous fixed-income markets
is illustrated in the following examples.
EXAMPLE 1

BRWA Corporation Debt Profile
Debt
Outstanding/
Availability

0.12% BRWA
150-day
Commercial Paper

Unsecured
364 Day
Facility

3.2% BRWA
Five-Year
Notes

Unsecured
3-year
Revolving
Credit
Facility

3.95% BRWA
Fifteen-Year
Notes

Years to
Maturity
1

2

5

10

30

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
Fixed-Income Segments, Issuers, and Investors

BRWA is an example of an investment-grade corporate issuer with ready access
to unsecured debt across maturities and markets as well as in different currencies
either directly or through its affiliates. It uses commercial paper to meet its shortterm or seasonal working capital needs, intermediate-term debt to cover more
permanent working capital or medium-term investments, and long-term debt to
match the longer useful life of capital investments, such as new manufacturing
equipment or factories. BRWA pays a fee to a group (or syndicate) of banks
for two credit facilities, which are loan agreements with pre-specified terms
and limits but with fluctuating balances based on borrower-specific needs at
different points in time, analogous to a credit card. The first is a 364-day facility
which backs the commercial paper program, and the second is a longer-term
revolving credit facility.
The combination of domestic and cross-border operating, financing, and leasing
activities in Example 1 leads many of BRWAвҖҷs real-world industry peers to have hundreds of unique debt instruments outstanding across all affiliates. We may contrast
the BRWA example with VIVU, the digital media company introduced in an earlier
module that has fewer fixed assets, less stable operating cash flows, and, therefore,
limited access to fixed-income markets.
EXAMPLE 2

VIVU Fixed-Income Issuance
Debt
Outstanding/
Availability

Secured
2-year
Credit
Facility

6.5% VIVU
Seven-Year
Callable Notes

Term
Loan A

Secured
Working
Capital
Facility

Years to
Maturity
1

2

5

10

30

VIVU is an example of a high-yield corporate issuer that has limited access to
secured debt across shorter maturities. VIVU has no access to the unsecured
commercial paper market but, rather, relies on partially drawn secured working
capital and credit facilities from banks to meet its short-term needs. VIVU has
a fully drawn loan (Term Loan A) that has a floating-rate coupon equal to MRR
plus a fixed credit spread. VIVU also has seven-year callable notes outstanding
under which it has the right to redeem the notes at a fixed price starting three
years from issuance.
Sovereign government issuers typically have the lowest credit risk (highest credit
rating) in each market, due to sovereign governmentsвҖҷ right to tax economic activity.
Developed market sovereign bonds are often widely held by both foreign investors and
foreign central banks seeking to hold reserves in the developed marketвҖҷs currency in
the form of an interest-bearing asset. Sovereign bonds also serve important functions

61

62

Learning Module 3

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
Fixed-Income Issuance and Trading

in the domestic financial system. Central banks often use domestic sovereign bonds
to conduct monetary policy, borrowing or lending these securities to increase or
decrease monetary reserves.
Investment-grade bond investors expect more stable cash flows, and defaults
among investment-grade issuers are relatively rare. Expected returns are therefore
lower than those for high-yield bonds and usually comparable or modestly higher than
those of sovereign bonds. High-yield investors expect greater return for assuming a
higher probability of default and often compare returns to those of equity investments.
EXAMPLE 3

Baywhite FinancialвҖҷs Bond Funds
Baywhite Financial manages its Core Bond Fund with the objectives of longrun capital appreciation with a relatively low tolerance for credit risk. The fund
invests in investment-grade intermediate- and long-term bonds, including
BRWAвҖҷs 5- and 15-year notes. The composition of the fundвҖҷs holdings, which
include 3,601 positions, is as follows:
Baywhite Core Bond Fund Holdings by Credit Rating
Not Rated
9%

BBB
19%
AAA
55%

A
13%

AA
4%

Baywhite Core Bond Fund Holdings by Issuer Type
Other Asset
Backed Securities
16%
Sovereign
28%

Mortgage
Backed Securities
23%

Corporate
33%

Baywhite Core Bond Fund Holdings by Time to Maturity

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
Fixed-Income Segments, Issuers, and Investors

23%
19%
16%
13%
11%

<1

1вҖ“3

3вҖ“5

5вҖ“7

9%

9%

7вҖ“10

10вҖ“20

20вҖ“30

Years to Maturity

Baywhite also manages the Short-Term Bond Fund as a liquid cash alternative for investors, and it takes minimal credit and interest rate risk by investing
in investment-grade, short-term bonds, such as BRWAвҖҷs commercial paper.
The composition of the Short-Term Bond FundвҖҷs holdings, which include 451
positions, is as follows:
Baywhite Short-Term Bond Fund Holdings by Credit Rating
Not Rated
3%
AAA
30%
BBB
34%

AA
8%

A
25%

Baywhite Short-Term Bond Fund Holdings by Issuer Type
Other Asset
Backed Securities
13%

Sovereign
13%

Mortgage
Backed Securities
18%

Corporate
56%

Baywhite Short-Term Bond Fund Holdings by Time to Maturity

63

64

Learning Module 3

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
Fixed-Income Issuance and Trading

57%

41%

2%
<1

1вҖ“3

3вҖ“5

0%

0%

0%

0%

5вҖ“7
Years to Maturity

7вҖ“10

10вҖ“20

20вҖ“30

Neither of these funds would invest in VIVUвҖҷs seven-year callable notes,
because both are restricted to owning investment-grade debt.
QUESTION SET
1. A fixed-income mutual fund that is required to invest in only investment-grade bonds would most likely invest in:
A. B rated bonds.
B. BB+ rated bonds.
C. BBB- rated bonds.
Solution:
C is correct. Both B and BB+ rated bonds are considered high-yield bonds.
A BBB- rated bond is considered the lowest investment-grade bond.
2. New issuers for which investors are likely to require collateral due to more
volatile operating cash flows are best categorized as:
A. fallen angels.
B. high-yield issuers.
C. investment-grade issuers.
Solution:
B is correct. High-yield issuers (not investment-grade issuers) include new
issuers for which investors are more likely to require collateral due to less
stable operating cash flows. Investment-grade issuers whose credit quality
has deteriorated since the time of issuance are known as fallen angels.
3. A corporate issuer seeking to fund working capital needs would most likely
issue:
A. commercial paper.
B. intermediate-term debt.
C. long-term debt.
Solution:
B is correct. A corporate issuer would use commercial paper to meet its
short-term or seasonal working capital needs, intermediate-term debt to
cover more medium-term investments, and long-term debt or equity to
match the longer useful life of capital investments.
4. A high-yield corporate issuer would most likely finance its operations using:
A. secured term loans.

Fixed-Income Indexes

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.

65

B. long-term callable bonds.
C. unsecured commercial paper.
Solution:
A is correct. A high-yield corporate issuer has limited access to secured debt
across shorter maturities but has no access to unsecured commercial paper
or the long-term bond market. (See Example 2.)
5. Identify the following statement as true or false. Justify your answer.
Foreign investors in emerging market debt have an expected return that is
similar to that of developed market sovereign bonds.
Solution:

False. Foreign investors in emerging market debt expect a return above that
of developed market sovereign bonds in exchange for holding bonds with
lower credit quality and higher risk related to currency fluctuations.

FIXED-INCOME INDEXES
describe types of fixed-income indexes
An earlier module highlighted the role of market indexes in tracking the broad risk
and return of different security markets, which enable the evaluation of market performance, benchmarking the performance of investments and investment managers,
and forming the basis for indexed investment strategies. Fixed-income indexes perform
a similar function in bond markets as equity indexes in stock markets but differ in
three important ways from their equity counterparts.
1. A single issuer may have many individual fixed-income securities outstanding. All bonds that meet index eligibility requirements are included in
indexes, causing fixed-income indexes to have many more constituent securities than equity indexes have. Some indexes have over 10,000 constituents.
2. The finite maturity of bonds and the higher frequency of new issuance lead
to far more changes in constituents (turnover) in fixed-income indexes than
in equity indexes. Bond indexes are usually rebalanced each month to both
add new issues and remove those that fall below a minimum maturity.
3. Analogous to equity indexes weighted by issuersвҖҷ market capitalization,
bond index constituents are usually weighted by market value of debt
outstanding. Since bonds are issued by many types of issuers, broad bond
indexes will reflect changes to bond market composition over timeвҖ”for
example, increases in public versus private issuer debt, longer maturities,
and deterioration in credit quality. Government issuers are large bond issuers, so many broad bond indexes have high weights of government debt.
If a bond fund aims to match the returns of a specific index, it will typically hold
a representative sample of constituent securities in order to match index returns
because the complexity of bond indexes makes it impossible to purchase all the constituent securities.

3

66

Learning Module 3

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
Fixed-Income Issuance and Trading

Fixed-income indexes can be classified as aggregate indexes, with a vast number of
constituents, or narrower indexes, based on criteria such as sector, credit quality, time
to maturity, geography, and ESG considerations. The choice of index for investment
manager performance evaluation is important and will be discussed in detail later in
the curriculum, but generally speaking, the index chosen to evaluate an investment
manager or fund should correspond to that managerвҖҷs or fundвҖҷs investment strategy. For
example, BaywhiteвҖҷs Short-Term Bond Fund invests in short-term, investment-grade
bonds. To evaluate the fund, its returns should be compared to an index of instruments
with similar maturity and credit quality.
The following three exhibits illustrate fixed-income indexes and their use by
investors.
Exhibit 3: Global Aggregate Bond Index
Bloomberg Barclays Global Aggregate Index
Brief Summary of Inclusion Criteria
Issuers:

Fixed-rate bonds from sovereign, government, corporate, and
securitized issuers based in DM and EM markets

Currencies:

28 eligible currencies across the Americas, EMEA, and Asia
Pacific

Credit Quality:

Investment-grade rating or equivalent

Coupon:

Fixed rate, zero coupon, and step-up coupon (if step-up dates are
predetermined)

Amount Outstanding:

Minimum issuance size by market, for example:
вҖ”CAD150 m
вҖ”USD300 m, EUR300 m, CHF300 m, AUD300 m
вҖ”CNY 5 bn (Treasury and bank debt)
вҖ”RUB20 bn
вҖ”JPY35 bn

Maturity:

At least one year to final maturity or average weighted maturity

Rebalancing Rules:

At each month end, the composition of the fixed set of bonds for
the following monthly index return is established. Bonds that no
longer meet maturity, rating, size, or other criteria are removed,
and new issues where security reference information and pricing
are available are included.

Reinvestment of Cash
Flows:

Intra-month interest and principal payments contribute to
monthly index returns and are reinvested into the index on the
following rebalancing date.

Market of Issue:

Global and regional public markets

Seniority of Debt:
Taxability:

Senior and subordinated issues
Only fully taxable issues are eligible.

The Bloomberg Barclays Global Aggregate Index includes fixed-coupon capital
market securities from all major issuer types in 28 developed and emerging
markets that meet the above inclusion criteria. However, the index excludes
high-yield and unrated debt instruments and those that do not meet minimum
issuance size.
The index sponsor prices all bonds at a predetermined time each business
day to calculate the index value. Mutual funds and ETFs that track this benchmark index offer comprehensive exposure to many fixed-income markets with
no active security selection and portfolio turnover limited solely to either new
issuance or issues no longer meeting inclusion criteria. Similar subindexes are

Fixed-Income Indexes

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.

available by market or region, and returns may include gains or losses due to
currency fluctuations (unhedged returns) or may offset these currency-based
changes using currency forwards on rebalancing dates (hedged returns).
The Bloomberg Barclays Global Aggregate Index might be appropriate to use to
evaluate Baywhite FinancialвҖҷs Core Bond Fund since it includes investment-grade,
longer-term bonds from a variety of sectors. However, if Baywhite invests in only a
single market, such as Japan, a more appropriate benchmark would be the Bloomberg
Barclays Japanese Aggregate Index.
The J.P. Morgan EMBI+ Index in Exhibit 4 is a more narrowly defined fixed-income
index that includes US dollarвҖ“denominated debt of sovereign governments at or below
a certain credit quality of a minimum issuance size and maturity. The focus on foreign
debt of lower credit quality targets a higher US dollarвҖ“based return than for developed
market sovereign bonds while assuming the external debt risk of issuer countries.

Exhibit 4: Emerging Markets Bond Index
J.P. Morgan Emerging Markets Bond Index Plus (EMBI+)
Brief Summary of Inclusion Criteria
Issuers:

Emerging market sovereign issuers of US dollar debt

Currencies:

Only US dollarвҖ“denominated bonds are included. Bonds with a
coupon or redemption payment linked to an exchange rate are not
eligible.

Credit Quality:

Sovereign rating of Baa1/BBB+/BBB+ or below by MoodyвҖҷs/S&P/
Fitch Ratings

Coupon:

Fixed rate, zero coupon, and step-up coupon (if step-up dates are
predetermined)

Amount Outstanding:

Issues with a current face amount outstanding of USD500 million
or more

Maturity:

Only instruments with at least 2.5 years until maturity are considered. At each month-end, instruments that will fall below 12
months to maturity during the upcoming month will be excluded.

Return Calculation:

Index total return is calculated as a weighted average of bond
returns using bid side prices.

Rebalancing:

Occurs on the final US business day of each month

Reinvestment of Cash
Flows:

All coupons received are immediately reinvested into the index

Bond investors seeking to incorporate ESG considerations into fixed-income investment
decisions frequently use bond indexes that regularly screen for and exclude issuers
that fail to meet certain minimum ESG criteria. For example, the Bloomberg Barclays
MSCI Euro Corporate Sustainable SRI Index (see Exhibit 5) filters by sector, currency,
credit quality, time to maturity, and ESG considerations, such as a minimum ESG
rating and exclusion of issuers involved in certain business activities.

67

68

Learning Module 3

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
Fixed-Income Issuance and Trading

Exhibit 5: Corporate Sustainable Socially Responsible Investment (SRI)
Bond Index
Bloomberg Barclays MSCI Euro Corporate Sustainable SRI Index
Brief Summary of Inclusion Criteria
Issuers:

Currencies:

Corporate (industrial, utility, and financial institution) issuers
Only euro-denominated bonds are included.

Credit Quality:

Security rating of Baa3/BBB-/BBB- or above by MoodyвҖҷs/S&P/
Fitch or equivalent

Coupon:

Fixed rate, zero coupon, and step-up coupon (if step-up dates are
predetermined)

Amount Outstanding:

EUR300 million minimum par amount outstanding

Maturity:

At least one year to final maturity, with fixed-to-floating perpetual
bonds excluded one year prior to conversion. Fixed-rate perpetual
bonds are excluded.

Return Calculation:

Index total return is calculated as a weighted average of bond
returns using bid side prices.

Rebalancing:

Occurs on the final US business day of each month

Reinvestment of Cash
Flows:

Intra-month interest and principal payments contribute to
monthly index returns and are reinvested into the index on the
following rebalancing date.

ESG Rules:

в– 

Must have an MSCI ESG rating of BBB or higher

в– 

Excludes issuers involved in the following business lines/
activities:

в– 

в—Ҹ

Alcohol

в—Ҹ

Tobacco

в—Ҹ

Gambling

в—Ҹ

Adult Entertainment

в—Ҹ

Genetically Modified Organisms (GMOs)

в—Ҹ

Nuclear Power

в—Ҹ

Civilian Firearms

в—Ҹ

Military Weapons

в—Ҹ

Thermal Coal

в—Ҹ

Generation of Thermal Coal

в—Ҹ

Oil Sands

Excludes issuers with a вҖңRedвҖқ MSCI Controversies score
measuring issuer involvement in major ESG controversies and
adherence to international norms and principles

QUESTION SET
1. Which of the following indexes would be most suitable for evaluating BaywhiteвҖҷs Short-Term Bond Fund?
An index composed primarily of:
A. high-yield short-term bonds.
B. investment-grade short-term bonds.

Fixed-Income Indexes

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.

C. investment-grade bonds with more than five years to maturity.
Solution:
B is correct. BaywhiteвҖҷs Short-Term Bond Fund invests in investment-grade,
short-term bonds. To evaluate this fund, its returns should be compared to
those of an index of similar maturity and credit instruments.
2. Match the characteristics on the right with the indexes on the left.
вҖӢ

A. Broad equity index

I. Includes sovereign issuers

B. Broad bond index

II. Less frequent rebalancing
III. Easier to fully replicate
IV. Larger number of constituents
вҖӢ

Solution:
A. II and III
B. I and IV
3. Relative to equity indexes, fixed-income indexes exhibit more turnover due
to:
A. annual rebalancing.
B. the finite maturity of bonds.
C. the lower frequency of new issues.
Solution:
B is correct. The finite maturity of bonds and the higher frequency of new
issuance leads to far more turnover in fixed-income indexes than in equity
indexes. Bond indexes are usually rebalanced each month to both add new
issues and remove those that fall below a minimum maturity.
4. The composition of broad bond indexes will most likely change due to
changes in:
A. the maturity mix of issuers only.
B. the proportion of public versus private issuers only.
C. both the maturity mix of issuers and the proportion of public versus
private issuers.
Solution:
C is correct. Since bonds are issued by many types of issuers, broad bond
indexes will reflect changes to bond market composition over timeвҖ”for example, increases in public versus private issuer debt, longer maturities, and
deterioration in credit quality.
5. Identify the following statement as true or false. Justify your answer.
The Bloomberg Barclays MSCI Euro Corporate Sustainable SRI Index
requires an MSCI ESG rating of AAA and excludes all emerging market
issuers.
Solution:

False. The Bloomberg Barclays MSCI Euro Corporate Sustainable SRI Index
requires an MSCI ESG rating of BBB or higher and excludes certain busi-

69

70

Learning Module 3

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
Fixed-Income Issuance and Trading

ness lines/activities, including alcohol, tobacco, gambling, and thermal coal.
Emerging market issuers are not excluded.

4

PRIMARY AND SECONDARY FIXED-INCOME MARKETS
compare primary and secondary fixed-income markets to equity
markets

Primary Fixed-Income Markets
Primary bond markets are markets in which an issuer sells a new bond or bonds
to investors to raise capital. In contrast, secondary bond markets are markets in
which existing bonds are traded among investors. As in the case of an IPO for equity
investors, an issuer approaching the bond market for the first time (often referred
to as a debut issuer) represents the first opportunity for a fixed-income investor
to purchase an issuerвҖҷs bonds. Bonds can be sold via a public offering, in which any
member of the public may buy the bonds, or via a private placement, in which only a
selected investor or group of investors may buy the bonds. Similar to primary equity
issuance, which typically involves a transfer from private to public ownership, a debut
issuer is often replacing private debt, such as a bank loan, with bonds. Examples of
debut bond issuers include
в– 

new corporate legal entities formed after a merger, acquisition, or divestiture, which usually refinance all existing debt outstanding;

в– 

companies that reach a more mature stage of the life cycle with more predictable cash flows and begin issuing debt; and

в– 

sovereign governments that raise external foreign currency debt for the first
time.

For debut issuers that must complete the respective domestic market or Eurobond
registration process, the underwriters usually conduct roadshows and other information
sessions for a period of several weeks prior to issuance to familiarize potential investors with the new entity and its uses of and sources for repayment for the new bond.
For repeat issuers of fixed-income securities, the process is far more abbreviated
than for debut issuers and for follow-on offerings of equities. Whereas publicly traded
companies that return to the equity market to increase their shares outstanding do
so under an identical instrument, fixed-income issuers usually issue a new security
priced at or close to par. A less common strategy is to increase the size of an existing
bond with a price significantly different from par, which is referred to as the reopening of an existing bond.
For example, unsecured investment-grade issuance of new corporate bonds usually takes place within a several-hour period, as shown in the diagram and timeline
in Exhibit 6.

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
Primary and Secondary Fixed-Income Markets

Exhibit 6: Investment-Grade Corporate Bond Issuance Timeline
Order Book
Size

9:15 AM
Transaction
Announced

9 am

10:30 AM
Investor
Conference Call

10 am

11 am

3:00 PM
Transaction
Priced

1:00 PM
12:00 PM
Price Guidance Transaction
Launched
Announced

12 noon

1 pm

2 pm

3 pm

Time
of Day

Illustrative Timeline:
9:00 a.m.

Underwriters and issuer agree to launch transaction

9:15 a.m.

Transaction announced (size, spread, and maturities TBD)
Electronic roadshow released
Order book opens to investors

10:30 a.m.

Investor conference call with issuer and underwriters

12:00 p.m.

Price guidance, size, and maturities subject to change
Order book closed to investors

1:00 p.m.

Transaction launched with final size, pricing, and maturities

1:00вҖ“3:00 p.m.

Underwriters allocate transaction to investors

3:00 p.m.

Transaction priced (government benchmark and coupon set)

4:00 p.m.

Final term sheet delivered, bonds free to trade same or next day

Exhibit 6 is an example of an underwritten bond offering in which one or more
financial intermediaries (or underwriters) guarantee the sale of the bond issue at
an offering price that is negotiated with the issuer. Investors in such bonds (e.g.,
Baywhite) are usually very familiar with the bond indenture and financial statements
of these frequent issuers. As in the case of BRWA earlier in this module, issuers of
such bonds have ready access to the bond market and often choose issuance timing
on an opportunistic basis when market conditions are most favorable. Underwriters
seek to manage the bond order book to ensure the greatest availability to large institutional investors at the lowest possible spread across maturities. Frequent bond issuers
use a shelf registration or a broad, all-encompassing offering circular that is updated
regularly and may be used for a range of future bond issuances.
Secured bond issuance among corporate high-yield, some special purpose entities,
and other issuers (e.g., VIVU) is usually a longer and more involved process than
for unsecured investment-grade bonds. Investors must familiarize themselves with
unique and more complex covenants, as well as the use of both operating cash flows
and collateral as sources of bond repayment. For bonds of lower credit quality, the
financial intermediary does not guarantee the sale and may serve only as a broker in
a best-efforts offering. That is, it tries to sell the bond issue on a commission basis at
the negotiated price only if it can do so.
In instances where the bond size is small, the issuer is less well known, or the
terms are more customized, a bond might take the form of a private placement or
non-underwritten, unregistered offering of bonds sold only to a small group of investors.
Primary market issuance of sovereign debt usually takes the form of a public
auction led by the national treasury or finance ministry, which are discussed in detail
in a later module.

71

72

Learning Module 3

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
Fixed-Income Issuance and Trading

Secondary Fixed-Income Markets
While progress continues to be made by various electronic marketplace platforms,
such as MarketAxess and Tradeweb, fixed-income markets are mostly quote-driven
or over-the-counter (OTC) markets. Major participants in secondary bond market
trading include institutional investors (such as the Baywhite funds introduced earlier),
financial intermediaries, and central banks.
Secondary bond market liquidity varies widely across fixed-income market segments and even among bonds outstanding from a single issuer. The bidвҖ“offer spread
or difference in price at which a dealer will buy (or bid) from a customer and sell (or
offer) to a customer is a key liquidity measure. This spread is often quoted in basis
points in fixed-income markets.
The most recently issued, or on-the-run, developed market sovereign bonds are
typically the most liquid fixed-income securities, with primary dealers making active
markets in large size with bidвҖ“offer spreads equal to a fraction of a basis point. In
some markets, such as Australia, domestic sovereign government bonds are traded
on an exchange. Among corporate issuers, recently issued corporate bonds from
frequent issuers of higher credit quality usually exhibit the greatest liquidity and
tightest bidвҖ“offer spreads. Underwriters and other dealers are more likely to hold
trading inventory in recent issues and may therefore quote bid-offer spreads of a few
basis points. Bonds of less frequent corporate issuers or more seasoned bonds of frequent issuers are rarely traded, leading dealers to quote bidвҖ“offer spreads of at least
10вҖ“20 basis points or more for small sizes. One exception that can increase trading
frequency of a seasoned issue is a significant deterioration in a bondвҖҷs credit quality,
as in the following example.
EXAMPLE 4

Hertz Corporation
Hertz Global Holdings Inc. (Hertz) is a US-based car rental company that filed
for Chapter 11 bankruptcy protection in May 2020 amid the initial outbreak of
COVID-19 in the United States. HertzвҖҷs bonds maturing in 2022 and 2028 were
trading at an average of less than 10% of par value, a decline of more than 90%
from three months earlier. However, a year later, the bonds rose back to their
pre-pandemic price as the company exited bankruptcy through a reorganization
with outside investors that kept these bonds intact.
Source: Bloomberg News

Bonds of issuers believed to be very close to or in bankruptcy, as in the previous
example, are referred to as distressed debt. Distressed debt typically trades in the
secondary market at a price well below par, because bondholders are unlikely to receive
all promised future interest and principal payments. Investors with policies limiting
their bond investments to highly rated securities may be forced to sell distressed debt,
while hedge funds and other opportunistic investors seeking more equity-like returns
(from price appreciation) are often the buyers of distressed bonds. Distressed debt
is traded until either the corporate issuer has liquidated its assets or its outstanding
bonds have been restructured. In contrast, an equity security may be removed or
delisted from secondary trading on an exchange if it fails to meet the listing requirements of the exchange, which often include minimum share prices, net worth, and
free float. By the time an issuerвҖҷs debt has become distressed, its equity securities will
likely have already been delisted.

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
Primary and Secondary Fixed-Income Markets

Finally, many bond issues do not trade at all on a regular basis. Price quotes from
dealers or on platforms such as Bloomberg for illiquid bonds often rely on estimates
derived from more liquid bonds of similar credit quality and maturity, a process
covered in a later module.
QUESTION SET
1. A bond issuance by a company after it has reached a more mature
stage of the life cycle with more predictable cash flows would be best considered a:
A. private placement.
B. primary fixed-income market transaction.
C. secondary fixed-income market transaction.
Solution:
B is correct. Primary bond markets are markets in which an issuer sells a
new bond or bonds to investors to raise capital. Secondary bond markets are
markets in which existing bonds are traded among investors. Bonds can be
sold via a private placement, in which only a selected investor or group of
investors may buy the bonds.
2. Which of the following statements about debut issuers is correct?
A. A debut issuer typically replaces bank loans with bonds.
B. Debut issuers transfer ownership from public to private markets.
C. Debut issuers offer bonds in a public offering, not a private placement.
Solution:
A is correct. Similar to primary equity issuance, which typically involves a
transfer from private to public ownership, a first-time bond issuer is often
replacing private debt, such as a bank loan, with bonds.
B is incorrect. Fixed-income securities have no voting or control rights, and
debut issues represent a private to public (not public to private) transition.
C is incorrect. A debut issuer can offer bonds in either a public offering or a
private placement.
3. Relative to unsecured issuers, secured issuers most likely experience an issuance timeline that is:
A. shorter.
B. the same.
C. longer.
Solution:
C is correct. Secured bond issuance among corporate high-yield, some special purpose entities, and other issuers (e.g., VIVU) is usually a longer and
more involved process than for unsecured investment-grade bonds. Investors must familiarize themselves with unique and more complex covenants,
as well as the use of both operating cash flows and collateral as sources of
bond repayment.

73

74

Learning Module 3

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
Fixed-Income Issuance and Trading

4. Identify the following statement as true or false. Justify your answer.
Secondary fixed-income markets consist mostly of quote-driven or overthe-counter markets, while secondary trading for listed equity markets
primarily occurs on an electronic exchange.
Solution:

True. Unlike listed equities, for which secondary trading largely occurs on
an electronic exchange, fixed-income markets consist mostly of quote-driven or over-the-counter markets.
5. For a firm in distress, its bonds will most likely stop trading:
A. before the firmвҖҷs equity.
B. at the same time as the firmвҖҷs equity.
C. after the firmвҖҷs equity.
Solution:
C is correct. Distressed debt is traded until either the corporate issuer has
liquidated its assets or its outstanding bonds have been restructured. In contrast, an equity security may be removed or delisted from secondary trading
on an exchange if it fails to meet the listing requirements of the exchange,
which often include minimum share prices, net worth, and free float. By the
time an issuerвҖҷs debt has become distressed, its equity securities will likely
have already been delisted.

Practice Problems

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.

PRACTICE PROBLEMS
1. Match the instrument type on the left with its typical investor on the right.
A. Commercial paper

I. Insurance companies

B. Unsecured corporate bonds

II. Hedge funds

C. Secured corporate bonds

III. Money market funds

2. An issuer with a AAA credit rating would most likely be a:
A. distressed issuer.
B. high-yield issuer.
C. sovereign issuer.
3. An index tracking the Bloomberg Barclays Global Aggregate Index would most
likely have:
A. limited security selection.
B. modest turnover due to changes in market values.
C. comprehensive exposure to fixed-income markets.
4. A firm that increases the size of an existing bond issue with a price significantly
different from par is conducting a:
A. reopening.
B. private placement.
C. distressed debt issuance.
5. The bond issue trading at the highest bidвҖ“offer spread is most likely a:
A. recently issued sovereign bond.
B. seasoned investment-grade corporate bond.
C. recently issued investment-grade corporate bond.

75

76

Learning Module 3

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
Fixed-Income Issuance and Trading

SOLUTIONS
1.
A. III
B. I
C. II
2. C is correct. Sovereign government issuers typically have the lowest credit risk
(highest credit rating) in each market, due to sovereign governmentsвҖҷ right to tax
economic activity. High-yield issuers have below-investment-grade credit ratings
(BBB- or below), while distressed issuers typically have high-yield ratings or are
in default.
3. C is correct. Mutual funds and ETFs that track this benchmark index offer
comprehensive exposure to many fixed-income markets with no active security
selection and portfolio turnover limited solely to either new issuance or issues no
longer meeting inclusion criteria.
4. A is correct. Increasing the size of an existing bond with a price significantly
different from par is referred to as the reopening of an existing bond. A private
placement refers to bonds being sold to a selected investor or group of investors,
versus a sale to the public. Bonds of issuers believed to be very close to or in
bankruptcy are referred to as distressed.
5. B is correct. Bonds of less frequent corporate issuers or more seasoned bonds
of frequent issuers are rarely traded, leading dealers to quote bidвҖ“offer spreads
of at least 10вҖ“20 basis points or more for small sizes. The most recently issued,
or on-the-run, developed market sovereign bonds are typically the most liquid
fixed-income securities, with primary dealers making active markets in large size
with bidвҖ“offer spreads equal to a fraction of a basis point. Among corporate issuers, recently issued corporate bonds from frequent issuers of higher credit quality
usually exhibit the greatest liquidity and tightest bidвҖ“offer spreads.

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.

LEARNING MODULE

4

Fixed-Income Markets for
Corporate Issuers
LEARNING OUTCOMES
Mastery

The candidate should be able to:
compare short-term funding alternatives available to corporations
and financial institutions
describe repurchase agreements (repos), their uses, and their
benefits and risks
contrast the long-term funding of investment-grade versus high-yield
corporate issuers

INTRODUCTION
Previous modules described various types of fixed-income issuers and investors. In
this module, we focus on the corporate fixed-income sector, composed of instruments issued by financial institutions and non-financial corporate issuers across the
time-to-maturity and credit spectrums. These instruments account for a significant
portion of total debt issuance and debt outstanding globally.
LEARNING MODULE OVERVIEW
в– 

Non-financial corporations frequently use short-term external
funding in the form of bank loans and securities, such as commercial paper to meet cash needs.

в– 

Financial institutions rely on deposits, interbank markets, commercial
paper, and repurchase agreements (repos) as primary sources of shortterm funding.

в– 

Commercial paper is a short-term unsecured promissory note issued
by both financial institutions and non-financial corporations.

в– 

A repurchase agreement (repo) is a form of short-term secured lending that involves the sale and simultaneous agreement to buy back a
security at a pre-agreed future price.

1

78

Learning Module 4

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
Fixed-Income Markets for Corporate Issuers

в– 

An investment-grade bond has a significant proportion of its
yield-to-maturity (YTM) attributed to the government benchmark
yield due to its strong ability to meet promised interest and principal
obligations from operating cash flows.

в– 

High-yield issuers are characterized by a higher expected likelihood
of financial distress. Relative to investment-grade bonds, a higher proportion of their bondsвҖҷ YTM is attributed to an issuer-specific spread
over the government benchmark yield.

LEARNING MODULE SELF-ASSESSMENT
These initial questions are intended to help you gauge your current level
of understanding of this learning module.
1. Which of the following financing instruments provides the most reliable
source of short-term bank funding for a non-financial corporation?
A. Revolving credit agreement
B. Committed bank line of credit
C. Uncommitted bank line of credit
Solution:
A is correct. Revolving credit agreements, also referred to as revolvers, are
the most reliable source of short-term bank funding.
B is incorrect. While committed lines of credit are a more reliable source
of financing than uncommitted lines because they involve a formal written
commitment, they are less reliable than revolvers. C is incorrect because
uncommitted bank lines of credit are the least reliable form of bank borrowing for a company.
2. Identify the following statement as true or false. Justify your answer.
In an unsecured loan, the lender requires the company to provide collateral
in the form of an asset that is pledged against the loan.
Solution:

False. Secured loans are loans in which the lender requires the company to
provide collateral in the form of an asset, such as a fixed asset that the company owns or high-quality receivables or inventory. These assets are pledged
against the loan, and the lender files a security interest against them. This
pledge or lien is added to the borrowing companyвҖҷs financial record and
reflected on its credit report. Companies that lack sufficient credit quality to
qualify for unsecured loans may attempt to obtain secured loans.
3. Relative to long-term debt and equity, repo funding provides which of the
following benefits to a financial institution?
A. Lower cost
B. Longer-term financing
C. Greater financial flexibility
Solution:
A is correct. Financial institutions must balance the low cost of repo funding
with the greater financial flexibility of more costly longer-term financing al-

Introduction

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.

ternatives, such as long-term debt and equity. B and C are incorrect because
they are both benefits of long-term debt and equity.
4. Venus, Inc., a financial institution, and Bank A, a large regional bank, enter
into a repurchase agreement in which Venus is the security seller and Bank
A is the security buyer. The repo is subject to a 102% initial margin. Which
of the following statements is correct?
A. Bank A benefits from a long-term cash investment on a collateralized
basis with minimal liquidity risk.
B. Bank A could generate higher returns for longer repo terms and/or by
accepting less liquid or lower-quality collateral.
C. The repo transaction reduces VenusвҖҷs funding requirement for the
security to a fraction of the bondвҖҷs purchase price.
Solution:
B is correct. Short-term repos with high-quality collateral (lowest risk)
result in the lowest return; however, investors can expect higher returns for
longer repo terms and/or by accepting less liquid or lower quality collateral.
A is incorrect because Bank A benefits from a short-term (not long-term)
cash investment on a collateralized basis with minimal liquidity risk.
C is incorrect because the repo transaction reduces Bank AвҖҷs (not VenusвҖҷs)
funding requirement for the security to a fraction of the bondвҖҷs purchase
price due to the 102% initial margin.
5. An investor is analyzing three bonds for a potential investment: a AA rated
bond, a B rated bond, and a CCC rated bond. Which of the bonds is most
appropriate if the investor is seeking safety with few issuer restrictions?
A. AA rated bond
B. B rated bond
C. CCC rated bond
Solution:
A is correct. The AA rated bond is investment grade with low likelihood of
default and minimal issuer restrictions. B and C are incorrect because the B
rated and CCC rated bonds are considered high yield with equity-like risk
attributes and often greater issuer restrictions.
6. A bond analyst would most likely consider the probability of default and loss
given default for:
A. an investment-grade bond because of its equity-like cash flow.
B. a high-yield bond because of its higher expected likelihood of financial
distress.
C. an investment-grade bond because of the importance of financial
ratios and credit ratings to determine the issuerвҖҷs likelihood of default.
Solution:
B is correct. High-yield issuers are characterized by a higher expected
likelihood of financial distress. Given the higher chance of default, these
instruments are more equity-like in nature and analysts place a greater emphasis on the likelihood (probability) of default, potential loss given default,
and the protections and secondary repayment sources that are available. A
is incorrect because investment-grade bonds exhibit bond-like cash flows,
for which there is a high probability of receiving the agreed-upon interest

79

80

Learning Module 4

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
Fixed-Income Markets for Corporate Issuers

and principal payments. C is incorrect because investment-grade bond
analysts use financial ratios and credit ratings to determine if and when an
investment-grade issuerвҖҷs likelihood of default will change and donвҖҷt rely on
probability of default or loss given default measures.

2

SHORT-TERM FUNDING ALTERNATIVES
compare short-term funding alternatives available to corporations
and financial institutions
Both non-financial corporations and financial institutions rely on borrowed capital
to support their short-term activities. As discussed in an earlier module in the corporate issuers reading, corporations use external short-term financing to meet cash
needs during their cash conversion cycle, preserve liquidity, and take advantage of
supplier discounts.
Non-financial corporate sources and uses of short-term funding are summarized
in Exhibit 1.

Exhibit 1: Sources and Uses of Short-Term Funding for Non-Financial
Corporates
Working Capital

Cash

Short-Term
Investments

Short-Term
Liabilities
Short-Term
Assets

Accounts
Receivable

Inventory

Accounts
Payable
Short-Term
Borrowing

Long-Term
Obligations

Long-Term
Assets

Ownership
Capital (Equity)

External Loan Financing
Non-financial corporations often rely on financial intermediaries for short-term
financing. Common instruments include
в– 

uncommitted bank lines of credit,

в– 

committed bank lines of credit, and

в– 

revolving credit agreements, or revolvers.

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
Short-Term Funding Alternatives

These can be unsecured or secured, depending on a companyвҖҷs financial strength,
general credit situation, and jurisdiction. Uncommitted lines and revolvers are used
more frequently in the United States, whereas regular committed lines are more
common elsewhere. Credit lines typically offer the most flexible and immediate access
to short-term funding.
Lines of Credit
Uncommitted lines of credit are the least reliable form of bank borrowing for a company, as the name suggests. A bank offers uncommitted credit lines up to a certain
principal amount (вҖңcredit lineвҖқ) for a pre-determined maximum maturity, charging a
base or market reference rate (MRR) plus an issuer-specific spread on only the principal outstanding for the period of use. Under normal business conditions, companies
often find uncommitted bank credit lines to be the most flexible and least costly means
of external funding. Banks usually offer these lines on an unsecured basis to clients
who maintain stable cash deposits at the bank, allowing the banks to closely monitor
and react to adverse borrower developments, such as declining account balances.
Uncommitted credit lines require minimal capital reserves until they are drawn down
and used, but banks reserve the right to refuse to honor any request for use of the line.
Firms cannot therefore rely on uncommitted lines as a primary source of funding,
because banks may choose not to lend if business or economic conditions deteriorate.
Alternative funding sources may be difficult to obtain or are prohibitively expensive
at times when uncommitted funding becomes unavailable. The primary attraction of
uncommitted lines is that they do not require the company to pay any compensation
other than interest on balances outstanding to the bank. From a bank perspective,
these uncommitted lines of credit serve as valuable tools to maintain a long-term
business relationship with the borrower through which the bank can monitor borrower
activity. Funding for these lines often comes from stable deposits that the bank holds,
allowing it to finance these lines using funds that depositors do not regularly touch.
Committed (regular) lines of credit are a more reliable source of financing than
uncommitted lines because they involve a formal written commitment. Committed
lines require more bank capital than uncommitted lines, although commitments of
less than a year (usually 364 days) minimize a bankвҖҷs capital requirement. For larger
corporate borrowers, banks often further reduce the committed capital needed to
support the line by forming a group of banks or a syndicate, which involves a mutual
agreement to accept a pre-determined percentage of the total credit commitment and
loan drawdown over time. When drawn, regular credit lines are short-term liabilities, usually classified as notes payable or the equivalent. Undrawn committed lines
are sometimes used as a source of backup credit for other financing forms, such as
short-term securities, as shown later.
Regular lines are unsecured and prepayable without penalty. Although they are a
more reliable source of short-term funding than uncommitted lines, these commitments face the risk of renewal at maturity, particularly when heavily used and drawn
by a borrower with weakening credit conditions. Unlike uncommitted lines, regular
lines usually involve upfront costs in the form of a commitment fee (such as 0.50%)
on either the full or unused amount of the line for the commitment period.
Revolving credit agreements, also referred to as вҖңrevolversвҖқ (or вҖңoperating lines
of creditвҖқ), are the most reliable source of short-term bank funding. These are multiyear credit commitments and lenders typically seek protections, such as covenants
which require or restrict certain borrower actions as in the case of a bond indenture.
Otherwise, revolvers have similar features to regular lines with respect to borrowing
rates and commitment fees and may also include optional medium-term loan features.

81

82

Learning Module 4

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
Fixed-Income Markets for Corporate Issuers

Secured Loans and Factoring
Secured loans, also called asset-based loans, are loans in which the lender requires
the company to provide collateral in the form of an asset, such as a fixed asset that
the company owns or high-quality receivables, inventory, or marketable securities.
These assets are pledged against the loan, and the lender files a security interest (or
right to possess the asset until the loan is repaid) against them. This pledge or lien is
added to the borrowing companyвҖҷs financial record and reflected on its credit report.
Companies that lack sufficient credit quality to qualify for unsecured loans might
arrange for secured loans.
A company can use its accounts receivable to generate cash flow through the
assignment of accounts receivable, which is the use of receivables as collateral for a
loan. Firms can also sell accounts receivable to a lender, called a factor, typically at
a substantial discount. Under an assignment, the company remains responsible for
the collection of the accounts, whereas in a factoring arrangement, the company
shifts the credit-granting and collection process to the lender or factor. The cost of
this credit (i.e., the amount of the discount) depends on the credit quality of the
accounts and the collection costs. Similarly, inventory can be used in different ways
as collateral for a loan.

External, Security-Based Financing
For some firms, loans can be more expensive than debt, secured or unsecured, issued
in financial markets. Large, highly rated companies can issue short-term, unsecured
notes known as commercial paper (CP) in the public market or via a private placement. Commercial paper issued by corporations typically matures in less than three
months and can be used to fund working capital, seasonal demand for cash, or to
provide bridge financing (i.e., interim financing that provides funds until permanent
financing can be arranged).
In most cases, maturing commercial paper is paid with the proceeds of newly
issued commercial paper (or вҖңrolled overвҖқ). This practice raises the possibility that an
issuer is unable to issue new paper at maturity, known as rollover risk. To minimize
rollover risk, investors usually require a committed backup line of credit from banks,
also referred to as a liquidity enhancement or backup liquidity lines. The purpose of
the backup lines of credit is to ensure that the issuer can fully repay maturing commercial paper if a rollover is not possible. Given their short maturity, commercial
paper markets adapt quickly to adverse credit events and defaults are relatively rare.
Apart from non-financial corporations, the largest commercial paper issuers
include financial institutions, governments, and supranational agencies. Commercial
paper issued in the international market is known as Eurocommercial paper (ECP).
Although similar to United States commercial paper (USCP), typical ECP transaction
sizes are much smaller and less liquid than the USCP market.

Short-Term Funding Alternatives for Financial Institutions
Common bank sources and uses of funding are shown in Exhibit 2. The short-term
funding needs of financial institutions, such as banks, arise from their role as intermediaries between borrowers and depositors. In addition to cash and reserves, most bank
assets are loans issued or securities purchased. Liabilities include deposits received
from households and firms, securities sold, or short-term borrowing.

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
Short-Term Funding Alternatives

Exhibit 2: Bank Short-Term Funding Sources and Uses
Cash

Deposits

Central Bank
Reserves

Short-Term
Liabilities
Short-Term
Assets

Short-Term
Loans

Long-Term
Obligations

Securities Purchased
under Agreements to
Resell or Borrowed

вҖ“

Securities Sold
under Agreements to
Repurchase or Loaned
Short-Term
Borrowing

Ownership
Capital (Equity)

Long-Term
Assets

rAssets

Certificates of
Deposit (< 1 year)

rLiabilities

= Net Interest Margin

Deposits
Household (or retail) and commercial deposits are a primary source of short-term
funding for most banks. These are usually in the form of checking accounts, or
deposits with no stated maturity available for transactional purposes that pay little or
no interest. Although these so-called demand deposit balances may be withdrawn at
any time, fee rebates, uncommitted credit lines, and other services extended by banks
under normal business conditions to their commercial customers allow them to rely
on this stable source to meet both short-term and longer-term funding needs. For
larger depositors, these so-called operational deposits generated by clearing, custody,
and cash management activities are also a relatively stable source of funding, while
rules requiring banks to maintain liquidity reserves against other less stable demand
deposits make them a less attractive funding source.
Saving deposits are usually held for non-transactional purposes and often have a
stated term. For example, a bank may accept a specific deposit with a pre-determined
maturity and interest rate known as a certificate of deposit (CD). CDs typically have
maturities shorter than one year and pay interest at maturity. A non-negotiable CD
involves payment of principal and interest at maturity to the initial depositor, with a
penalty for early withdrawal. Negotiable CDs allow a depositor to withdraw funds by
selling the CD in the open market prior to maturity. A negotiable CD oriented toward
the retail market is called a small-denomination CD, while large-denomination CDs
are a common source of wholesale funding from institutional investors. As in the case
of CP, CDs are traded in the Eurobond market.
Interbank Market
The interbank market involves short-term borrowing and lending among financial
institutions on a secured or unsecured basis. Unsecured loans and deposits in the
interbank market typically range from overnight to a one-year term at an interest
rate closely tied to a market reference rate. Banks typically factor credit risk into the
interest rate on these loans and deposits and impose counterparty limits as part of
their credit risk management.
In most countries, banks and other financial institutions are required to maintain
reserves at the central bank. While some banks may have excess funds over the minimum reserve requirement, others may run short of required reserves. This imbalance
is solved through the central bank funds market, allowing banks with a surplus of

83

84

Learning Module 4

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
Fixed-Income Markets for Corporate Issuers

funds to lend to others. The interest rate at which central bank funds are bought
(i.e., borrowed) and sold (i.e., lent) is known as the central bank funds rate. Central
banks target a specific rate or range of policy rates and use open market operations
or interest paid on reserves to achieve it. A bank unable to borrow in the interbank
market may do so directly from the central bank as a last resort (discount window
lending), but this is typically associated with posting of collateral with the central
bank and may lead to greater central bank oversight that can result in restrictions on
the bankвҖҷs activities to address the bankвҖҷs liquidity issues. Such lending is offered at a
higher interest rate than the central bank funds rate.
The most common form of secured interbank borrowing and lending involves
repurchase agreements addressed in the next lesson.
Commercial Paper
Commercial paper issuance is dominated by large financial institutions, which use
these unsecured notes to meet short-term borrowing needs and in some cases to fund
longer-term balance sheet assets, such as loans. Approximately 60% of the annual
issuance volume comes from financial institutions, and the remainder comes from
non-financial corporate issuers. As in the case of non-financial corporations, banks
also face rollover risk to the extent that their funding needs exceed the maturity of
commercial paper outstanding.
Banks and other financial institutions also commonly use a secured form of commercial paper issuance known as asset-backed commercial paper (ABCP). Recall
from an earlier lesson that in some cases, loans or receivables are sold to a special
purpose entity (SPE) that issues debt and makes interest and principal payments from
asset cash flows. Exhibit 3 shows an ABCP issuance in two simple steps (asset-backed
securities will be covered in detail later). First, a bank agrees to transfer short-term
loans to an SPE in exchange for cash. Second, the SPE issues ABCP to investors with
a backup credit liquidity line provided by the bank.

Exhibit 3: Asset-Backed Commercial Paper Issuance
Step 1:

Short-Term
Loans

Bank

SPE
Cash

Step 2:
ABCP
SPE

Bank
Back Up Credit
Facility

Investor
Investor
Investor

This financing is not recorded on the balance sheet of the issuer, and such
off-balance-sheet financing benefits both the bank (as the SPE sponsor and backup
credit provider) and investors. The bank receives cash when the commercial paper
is issued and reduces its capital costs by providing undrawn backup liquidity instead
of holding the short-term loans to maturity. Investors purchase a liquid, short-term
note with interest and principal payments from a loan portfolio to which they would
otherwise not have direct access.

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
Short-Term Funding Alternatives

The ABCP market experienced rapid growth prior to the Global Financial Crisis
due in part to a significant increase in the funding of long-term assets using short-term
notes. However, the inability of many issuers to roll ABCP at the height of the crisis
caused numerous SPEs to fail. Following the crisis, the ABCP market reverted to
primarily funding short-term, generally high-quality loans and receivables.
QUESTION SET
1. Pennington Corporation is a large pharmaceutical company with
an investment-grade credit rating and uses Cavalier Bank for some of its
financing needs. Pennington maintains stable cash deposits at Cavalier Bank
and is seeking a short-term financing option with no upfront commitment
fee. Which of the following financing options would be most appropriate for
Pennington?
A. Secured loan
B. Committed bank line of credit
C. Uncommitted bank line of credit
Solution:
C is correct. Banks offer uncommitted lines of credit on an unsecured basis
to clients who maintain stable cash deposits at the bank, allowing the banks
to closely monitor and react to adverse borrower developments, such as declining account balances. Uncommitted lines of credit also have no upfront
commitment fee and are obtained by stronger companies, such as Pennington. A is incorrect because secured loans are obtained by companies that
lack sufficient credit quality to qualify for unsecured loans. B is incorrect
because committed lines of credit have upfront commitment fees.
2. Which of the following statements about revolvers is correct?
A. Revolvers are the least reliable form of bank borrowing for a company.
B. Revolvers are multiyear credit commitments where lenders typically
seek covenants that require or restrict certain borrower actions.
C. Revolvers usually involve upfront costs in the form of a commitment
fee on either the full or the unused amount of the line for the commitment period.
Solution:
B is correct. Revolvers are multiyear credit commitments in which lenders typically seek protections, such as covenants, which require or restrict
certain borrower actions, as in the case of a bond indenture. A is incorrect
because uncommitted lines of credit are the least reliable form of bank borrowing for a company. C is incorrect because committed lines of credit, not
revolvers, usually involve upfront costs in the form of a commitment fee on
either the full or the unused amount of the line for the commitment period.
3. Which of the following would a commercial paper issuer most likely obtain
to minimize rollover risk?
A. Credit rating
B. Bridge financing

85

86

Learning Module 4

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
Fixed-Income Markets for Corporate Issuers

C. Liquidity enhancement
Solution:
C is correct. To minimize rollover risk, investors usually require a liquidity
enhancement to ensure that the issuer can fully repay maturing commercial
paper if a rollover is not possible. B is incorrect because bridge financing,
which is interim financing that provides funds until permanent financing
can be arranged, would require additional issuance of commercial paper
by the issuer, increasing rollover risk. A is incorrect because a credit rating
does not affect rollover risk.
4. Which of the following statements about asset-backed commercial paper is
correct?
A. This financing is not recorded on the balance sheet of the issuer.
B. The bank issues ABCP to investors with a backup credit liquidity line
provided by the SPE.
C. Investors purchase an illiquid, short-term note with interest and principal payments from the SPE.
Solution:
A is correct. This financing is not recorded on the balance sheet of the
issuer. B is incorrect because the SPE (not the bank) issues ABCP to investors with a backup credit liquidity line provided by the bank. C is incorrect
because investors purchase a liquid, short-term note from the SPE.

3

REPURCHASE AGREEMENTS
describe repurchase agreements (repos), their uses, and their
benefits and risks
An important source of secured short-term lending and borrowing is the repurchase
agreement (repo) market. A repurchase agreement, or repo, involves the sale of a
security with a simultaneous agreement by the seller to buy the same (or a similar)
security back from the purchaser at an agreed-on repurchase price and future date
called the repurchase date. Exhibit 4 shows the mechanics of a simple repurchase
agreement.

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
Repurchase Agreements

Exhibit 4: Repurchase Agreement
Agree at t = 0 to sell a
security today and
repurchase at time t = T

At time t = T, cash plus
interest is exchanged for
the same security

Time

$100 million
US 5-year
Treasury Note

t=0

t=T

Security Buyer
(Cash Lender)

Security Buyer
(Cash Lender)

$100,000,000

Security Seller
(Cash Borrower)

$100,020,833

$100 million
US 5-year
Treasury Note

Security Seller
(Cash Borrower)

Assume that today (t = 0) the current US five-year Treasury note trades at a price equal
to the bondвҖҷs face value of USD100,000,000. The security buyer takes delivery of the
US Treasury note today and pays the security seller USD100,000,000. If we assume
a repo term of 30 days (and 360 days in a year) and an annual interest rate (or repo
rate) of 0.25%, then the buyer agrees to return the Treasury note 30 days from today
(t = T) to the seller at a repurchase price of USD100,020,833, calculated as follows:
USD100,000,000 Г— [1 + (0.25% Г— 30/360)] = USD100,020,833.
In effect, the security seller borrows USD100,000,000 on a short-term basis at a low
cost, with interest (USD20,833) paid at maturity, because the loan is collateralized
by the US Treasury note.
The details of repo and other money market interest calculations are addressed in
a later lesson. In a repo transaction, the seller of the security (cash borrower) retains
ownership of the security over the repo term, as well as the interest and actual coupon
paid by the security, while the security buyer (cash lender) receives the repo rate.
Because cash lenders in the repo market are primarily interested in both the liquidity
and safety of their investments, most repos are typically very short-term transactions
with the highest-quality securities (e.g., sovereign bonds) serving as collateral. Repo
periods range from overnight to so-called term repos, those involving any maturity
longer than one day. The underlying securities used in repo transactions are usually
limited to the most liquid bonds with the lowest credit risk, such as sovereign bonds
of various maturities. Rather than involving a specific security as in Exhibit 4, a repo
transaction may instead reference a specific group of securities as eligible collateral
(such as government bonds of a specific maturity) in what is known as a general
collateral repo transaction. These transactions take place at the general collateral
repo rate.
In addition to the high quality of underlying securities, repos include features
designed to reduce the risk of a collateral shortfall over the contract life. One such
feature is the provision of collateral in excess of the cash exchanged, known as initial
margin, defined as the following ratio:
вҖӢSecurity PriceвҖӢ0вҖӢ

вҖҜвҖҜ
	вҖӢInitial Margin = ____________
вҖӢвҖҜвҖҜ
вҖӢP
urchase PriceвҖӢ вҖӢвҖӢ.вҖӢ	
0

(1)

87

88

Learning Module 4

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
Fixed-Income Markets for Corporate Issuers

A 100% initial margin indicates a fully collateralized loan, while a higher margin
indicates even greater initial collateral protection. This is alternatively considered
a reduction or haircut of the underlying loan relative to the initial collateral value,
which may be shown as follows:
вҖӢSecurity PriceвҖӢ0вҖӢвҲ’ вҖӢPurchase PriceвҖӢ0вҖӢ

вҖҜвҖҜ
вҖӢ.вҖӢ	
	вҖӢHaircut = ________________________
вҖӢвҖҜвҖҜвҖҜ
вҖӢS
ecurity PriceвҖӢ вҖӢ
0

(2)

The use of excess collateral is shown in the following repo example.
KNOWLEDGE CHECK
1. Assume the repurchase agreement in Exhibit 4 is subject to a 102%
initial margin.
Calculate the revised original purchase price (loan amount).

Solution: Using an initial margin of 102%, we can solve for a revised purchase price using Equation 1:
вҖӢSecurity PriceвҖӢ0вҖӢ

	вҖӢInitial Margin = ____________
вҖӢвҖҜвҖҜ
вҖҜвҖҜ
вҖӢPurchase PriceвҖӢ вҖӢвҖӢ.вҖӢ
0

USD100, 000, 000

вҖҜвҖҜ
	вҖӢ102 %вҖүвҖ… = _____________
вҖӢвҖҜвҖҜ
вҖӢP
urchase PriceвҖӢ вҖӢ вҖӢ.вҖӢ
0

	вҖӢPurchase PriceвҖӢ0вҖӢ = USD98, 039, 216.вҖӢ
Note that security seller must finance the remaining USD1,960,784 from
other sources.
2. Calculate the associated repo haircut.

Solution: Using Equation 2, solve for the haircut as follows:
вҖӢSecurity PriceвҖӢ0вҖӢвҲ’ вҖӢPurchase PriceвҖӢ0вҖӢ

вҖҜвҖҜ
вҖӢ.вҖӢ
	вҖӢHaircut= ________________________
вҖӢвҖҜвҖҜвҖҜ
вҖӢS
ecurity PriceвҖӢ вҖӢ
0

USD100,000,000 вҲ’ USD98,039,216

вҖҜвҖҜвҖӢ.вҖӢ
	вҖӢHaircut= __________________________
вҖӢвҖҜвҖҜвҖҜ
USD100,000,000
	вҖӢHaircut = 1.96 % .вҖӢ
3. Calculate the repurchase price using the same 30-day repo term and 0.25%
repo rate.
Solution: The repurchase price may be calculated as follows:

Repurchase price = USD98,039,216Г— [1 + (0.25% Г— 30/360)].
Repurchase price = USD98,059,641.
Repos address collateral value changes by granting contract participants the right
to request additional collateral (or release existing collateral) to maintain a security
interest equal to the original initial margin terms. This variable margin payment
(referred to as variation margin) is equal to the difference between current margin
required and the securityвҖҷs price at time t, as shown in Equation 3:
	вҖӢVariation margin = вҖӢ(Initial margin Г— вҖӢPurchase priceвҖӢtвҖӢ)вҖӢвҲ’ вҖӢSecurity PriceвҖӢtвҖӢ.вҖӢ	

(3)

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
Repurchase Agreements

For example, a security price decline requires a cash borrower (security seller) to
provide additional collateral to the seller.
KNOWLEDGE CHECK
1. Assume the same repurchase agreement terms from Exhibit 4 and
the previous Knowledge Check. Calculate the variation margin five days
after trade inception if the price of the five-year US Treasury note rises to
103% of the securityвҖҷs USD100 million face value.
Solution:

Recall the original loan amount (or purchase price at t = 0) is equal to
USD98,039,216, or USD100,000,000/1.02. We may solve for the purchase
price when t = 5 as follows:
Purchase price = USD98,039,216Г— [1 + (0.25% Г— 5/360)].
Purchase price = USD98,042,620.
To calculate the variation margin, we use Equation 3:
	вҖӢVariation margin = (вҖӢ Initial margin Г— вҖӢPurchase priceвҖӢtвҖӢ)вҖӢвҲ’ вҖӢSecurity priceвҖӢtвҖӢ.вҖӢ
	вҖӢVariation margin = вҖӢ(102% Г— USD98, 042, 620)вҖӢвҲ’ USD103, 000, 000.вҖӢ
	вҖӢVariation margin = вҲ’ USD2, 996, 528.вҖӢ
The security price increase to USD103,000,000 resulted in an overcollateralization of the loan by USD2,996,528, allowing the cash borrower (security
seller) to request the release of five-year US Treasury notes with a face value
of approximately USD2.91 million (= USD2,996,528/1.03).
Repo contract participants typically agree to margining and other terms, such as
the substitutability of collateral and events of default, in a master repurchase agreement or similar legal document that governs all trades between parties.

Repurchase Agreement Applications and Benefits
Financial market participants use the repo market for three specific purposes:
в– 

Finance the ownership of a security

в– 

Earn short-term income by lending funds on a secured basis

в– 

Borrow a security in order to sell it short

Financial institutions that trade securities often or hold securities inventory
frequently participate in the repo market as security sellers or cash borrowers. For
example, say an investor sells a bond to a bankвҖҷs trading desk in exchange for cash. The
bank must pay the investor immediately although it may intend to sell the security to
another party at a later time. To do so, the bank may borrow the purchase price from
another bank or an asset manager in exchange for delivering the bond just purchased.
The repo transaction reduces the bankвҖҷs funding requirement for the security to a
fraction (equal to the initial margin) of the bondвҖҷs purchase price.
From a security buyerвҖҷs perspective, a repo offers a short-term cash investment
on a collateralized basis with minimal liquidity or default risk. Overnight cash repos
with high-quality collateral result in the lowest return; investors can generate higher
returns for longer repo terms or by accepting less liquid or lower quality collateral.

89

90

Learning Module 4

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
Fixed-Income Markets for Corporate Issuers

These investors include banks and other institutions, such as mutual funds or pension
funds. As shown in Exhibit 2, these short-term assets appear on a bankвҖҷs balance sheet
as вҖңSecurities Purchased under Agreements to Resell or Borrowed.вҖқ
Central banks are also active participants in the repo market to conduct monetary
policy. While reserve requirements and the outright purchase and sale of securities
are more permanent means of influencing the money supply, repo contracts are
frequently used for shorter-term, transitory policy measures. For example, a central
bank may temporarily increase cash reserves in the banking system by borrowing
securities and lending cash.
Sometimes, a security buyer enters a repo not only to lend cash for interest but
also to use the security for another use. For instance, a hedge fund may take a short
position in a security, with a view that its price will decline. The use of a repo transaction to facilitate this transaction is shown in Exhibit 5.

Exhibit 5: Reverse Repos and Short Security Positions
Time
t=T

t=0
1.) Borrow security
in repo market

Hedge Fund
(Security Buyer)

Purchase
Price

Security

Hedge Fund
(Security Purchase)

3.) Buy security in
cash market

Security

Security Seller
(Cash Borrower)

Cash

Securities
Market

4.) Return borrowed
security in repo
market

Hedge Fund
(Security Sale)

2.) Sell security
in cash market

Cash

Security

Securities
Market

Hedge Fund
(Security Buyer)

Repurchase
Price

Security

Security Seller
(Cash Borrower)

Exhibit 5 illustrates this transaction in four steps:
At time t = 0:
1. The hedge fund borrows the security in exchange for cash in a repo
transaction.
2. The hedge fund simultaneously sells the security in the secondary market
and receives cash.

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
Repurchase Agreements

At time t = T:
3. The hedge fund purchases the security in the secondary market and pays the
current market price.
4. The hedge fund simultaneously delivers the security at the pre-agreed repurchase price for cash to settle the repo.
When viewed from the perspective of the security buyer (cash lender), a repo transaction is sometimes referred to as a reverse repurchase agreement or reverse repo.
KNOWLEDGE CHECK
1. Assume that a hedge fund enters the same repurchase agreement
from Exhibit 4 as the security buyer (cash lender), sells the security short in
the secondary market today, and buys back the security to deliver for repo
settlement in 30 days. For purposes of this example, we exclude initial or
variation margin.
Calculate the hedge fundвҖҷs return on the transaction if it is able to purchase
the five-year US Treasury note in 30 days in the secondary market at a price
equal to 99% of the face value.
Solution:

Follow the four steps in Exhibit 5:
1. The hedge fund borrows the five-year US Treasury note priced at
USD100,000,000 today and delivers USD100,000,000 in cash to the
security seller in a repo transaction.
As in Exhibit 4, the hedge fund (security buyer) agrees to return the
five-year Treasury note 30 days from today to the seller at a repurchase price of USD100,020,833, calculated (using a 0.25% repo rate) as
follows:
USD100,000,000 Г— [1 + (0.25% Г— 30)/360] = USD100,020,833.
2. The hedge fund simultaneously sells the five-year US Treasury note in
the secondary market today and receives USD100,000,000 in cash.
3. In 30 days, the hedge fund purchases the five-year US Treasury note in
the secondary market at the current market price of USD99,000,000.
4. The hedge fund simultaneously delivers the five-year US Treasury note
and receives the pre-agreed repurchase price of USD100,020,833 to
settle the repo.
The hedge fund has therefore earned a return of USD1,020,833 (=
USD100,020,833 вҲ’ USD99,000,000), ignoring transaction costs. The hedge
fundвҖҷs short position yields a profit because the price of the Treasury note
fell over the time period.
Ignoring initial margin and other transaction costs, the hedge fund will earn a
positive return if the short position gain exceeds the repo rate for the period. Note that
such a repo transaction requires delivery of a particular security, known as a special
trade, which occurs at a special collateral rate. When a particular security is subject
to very high borrowing demand, this special repo rate may fall below the general
collateral repo rate or even below zero. Under a negative repo rate, the security buyer
pays interest on cash lent to the cash borrower.

91

92

Learning Module 4

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
Fixed-Income Markets for Corporate Issuers

Repo rates are influenced by several factors, including the following:
в– 

Money market interest rates: Repo rates are correlated with other shortterm interest rates. Central banks use secured repo markets to influence the
unsecured central bank funds rate.

в– 

Collateral quality: Higher collateral risk increases repo rates. Repo rates
are usually higher for equity securities or emerging market bonds than for
developed market government bonds.

в– 

Repo term: Repo rates generally increase with maturity, because long-term
rates exceed short-term rates under normal market conditions and a longer
term increases credit risk.

в– 

Collateral uniqueness: The higher the demand for a specific security, the
lower the repo rate. The most recently issued or on-the-run developed market sovereign bonds typically have the lowest repo rates in a given market.

в– 

Collateral delivery: Repo rates are usually higher when either the cash lent is
undercollateralized or no collateral is provided to the funds lender.

Risks Associated with Repurchase Agreements
Repo markets are a widely used source of short-term funding, with relatively low
borrowing costs relative to other financing available to banks and other financial
institutions. However, repurchase agreements involve a number of structural risks, and
excessive reliance on this form of secured financing under adverse market conditions
can lead to financial distress or insolvency.
Each repo contract participant is exposed to the risk that the other party is unable
to meet its obligations. While the secured nature of repo contracts reduces risk due
to the value of the underlying collateral, several risks are important to consider:
в– 

Default risk: Default risk is the primary exposure under a repo transaction,
despite the existence of collateral. Collateral received from less creditworthy
parties is more likely to be tested under a default scenario and may face
illiquidity, adverse price changes, and legal or operational challenges.

в– 

Collateral risk: In addition to minimizing liquidity and credit risks to ensure
quick and efficient liquidation under a default, the collateral should have
little or no correlation with the credit risk of the repo counterparty in order
to diversify credit exposure.

в– 

Margining risk: Proper and timely collateral valuation and transfer of variation margin to minimize collateral shortfalls in the event of liquidation
following a default are important. Such adverse market conditions may also
cause large changes in collateral value, increasing margin calls among market participants and forcing further liquidations.

в– 

Legal risk: Addresses the ability to enforce legal rights under a repurchase
agreement.

в– 

Netting and settlement risk: Addresses the ability of repo contract participants to both offset or net the obligations of a non-defaulting party and take
possession of collateral or cash in settlement of a trade.

In many cases, repo market participants manage these risks by engaging a third
party. Repos executed directly between two parties are called bilateral repos; under a
triparty repo, both parties agree to use a third-party agent for the transaction. While
triparty agents do not change the credit risk relationship between repo participants
in the event of default, they create cost efficiencies by providing access to a larger
collateral pool and multiple counterparties, as well as specializing in the valuation

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
Repurchase Agreements

and safekeeping of assets. The triparty agent (a custodian or clearinghouse) administers the transaction and is responsible for cash, securities, collateral valuation, and
management, as well as collateral custody, as shown in Exhibit 6.

Exhibit 6: Bilateral versus Triparty Repo Agreements
Bilateral Repo Transaction
Long-term yield

Party A
Securities Lender
Cash Borrower

Party B
Securities Borrower
Cash Lender

Short-term
repo rate

Triparty Repo Transaction
Trade details

Party A
Securities Lender
Cash Borrower
Long-term
yield
Short-term
repo rate

Party B
Securities Borrower
Cash Lender
Long-term
yield

Triparty Collateral
Agent Holds
Cash, Securities
as Custodian

Short-term
repo rate

While the repo market represents a more stable funding source than short-term
unsecured financing, both the uncommitted nature of repo markets and their very
short (mostly overnight) maturity give rise to significant rollover and liquidity risks
under adverse market conditions. Financial institutions must balance the low cost of
repo funding with the greater financial flexibility of more costly longer-term financing
alternatives, such as long-term debt and equity. In theory, the collateralized nature
of repo transactions should provide cash lenders comfort to roll existing repo trades.
In practice, financial firms that have lost the confidence of market participants have
faced substantial losses and even bankruptcy during past financial crises due in part
to their heavy reliance on repo financing.
THE FALL OF BEAR STEARNS AND THE REPO MARKET
Bear Stearns was the fifth-largest US investment bank, with USD350 billion in
total assets at the end of 2006 and record revenue of over USD9 billion in that
year. As a major underwriter of mortgage-backed securities (MBS) and subprime
MBS, the firm faced challenges in 2007 as the MBS market deteriorated. The
firmвҖҷs losses mounted due to the failure of subprime mortgage hedge funds it
had sponsored in July 2007 and the write-down of over USD2 billion in MBS it
held later in the year, resulting in its first ever quarterly loss and a credit downgrade at the end of 2007.
At the same time, Bear Stearns significantly reduced its unsecured shortterm funding (from USD25.8 billion at the end of 2006 to USD11.6 billion at the
end of 2007) and specifically its commercial paper (USD20.7 billion to USD3.9
billion) in favor of secured fundingвҖ“specifically, repo borrowing. As of 10 March

93

94

Learning Module 4

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
Fixed-Income Markets for Corporate Issuers

2008, Bear Stearns had USD18 billion in cash, but within two days, a loss of
confidence due to the credit downgrade of related entities and market rumors
caused this to fall to USD2 billion. Specifically, repo counterparties declined
to roll over or renew repo trades, prime brokerage clients withdrew cash and
securities, and other banks withdrew or refused to extend credit. On Friday, 14
March 2008, Bear Stearns received an emergency Federal Reserve loan against
its securities collateral to prevent its failure, and on Monday, 17 March 2008,
Bear Stearns agreed to be purchased by JPMorgan, which received a loan from
the Federal Reserve.
QUESTION SET
1. Assume that today (t = 0) the current US five-year Treasury note
trades at a price equal to the bondвҖҷs face value of USD100,000,000. The security buyer takes delivery of the US Treasury note today and pays the security
seller a purchase price based on an initial margin of 103%. The repo haircut
is closest to:
A. 0.00%.
B. 2.91%.
C. 3.00%.
Solution:
B is correct. Using an initial margin of 103%, the purchase price (loan
amount) is calculated as USD100,000,000/1.03 = USD97,087,379.
The repo haircut is then calculated as
(USD100,000,000 вҲ’ USD97,087,379)/USD100,000,000 = 2.91%.
2. Assume that today (t = 0) the current US five-year Treasury note trades at a
price equal to the bondвҖҷs face value of USD200,000,000. The security buyer
takes delivery of the US Treasury note today and pays the security seller a
purchase price based on an initial margin of 102%. Assume a repo term of
15 days (and 360 days in a year) and an annual interest rate (or repo rate) of
0.50%. If the buyer agrees to return the five-year Treasury note 15 days from
today (t = T) to the seller, the repurchase price is closest to:
A. USD196,119,281.
B. USD196,160,130.
C. USD200,041,667.
Solution:
A is correct. Using an initial margin of 102%, the purchase price (loan
amount) is calculated as USD200,000,000/1.02 = USD196,078,431.
The repurchase price is then calculated as follows:
USD196,119,281 = USD196,078,431 Г— [1 + (0.50% Г— 15)/360].
B is incorrect because it incorrectly uses a repo term of 30 days:
USD196,160,130 = USD196,078,431 Г— [1 + (0.50% Г— 30)/360].
C is incorrect because it does not incorporate the initial margin in calculating the purchase price:
USD200,041,667 = USD200,000,000 Г— [1 + (0.50% Г— 15)/360].

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
Long-Term Corporate Debt

95

3. Which of the following statements about repos is correct?
A. Financial market participants use the repo market to earn short-term
income by lending funds on a secured basis.
B. Investors can generate higher returns for shorter repo terms.
C. From a security buyerвҖҷs perspective, a repo offers a short-term cash
investment on a collateralized basis with significant liquidity or default
risk.
Solution:
A is correct. Financial market participants use the repo market to earn
short-term income by lending funds on a secured basis. B is incorrect
because investors can generate higher returns for longer (not shorter) repo
terms. C is incorrect because from a security buyerвҖҷs perspective, a repo
offers a short-term cash investment on a collateralized basis with minimal
(not significant) liquidity or default risk.
4. Which of the following statements about repos is correct?
A. Repo rates are correlated with other short-term interest rates.
B. Repo rates are usually lower for equity securities or emerging market
bonds than for developed market government bonds.
C. Most recently issued or on-the-run developed market sovereign bonds
typically have the highest repo rates in a given market.
Solution:
A is correct. Repo rates are correlated with other short-term interest rates.
Central banks use secured repo markets to influence the unsecured central
bank funds rate. B is incorrect because repo rates are usually higher for equity securities or emerging market bonds than for developed market government bonds. C is incorrect because the most recently issued or on-the-run
developed market sovereign bonds typically have the lowest repo rates in a
given market.

LONG-TERM CORPORATE DEBT
contrast the long-term funding of investment-grade versus high-yield
corporate issuers
Earlier lessons on corporate issuers addressed the uses of long-term debt, including
more stable funding for short-term activities and long-term needs, such as capital
investments. While corporate issuers face similar capital allocation and capital structure decisions when issuing long-term debt regardless of their credit quality, differences in credit give rise to different features and availability of long-term corporate
funding. Recall that corporate issuers categorized as investment grade (IG) have a
stronger capacity to meet future fixed obligations from cash flows, while the ability
of high-yield (HY) issuers to meet debt interest and principal payments is considered
more vulnerable. The relative credit quality of an issuer grows in importance for longer
maturities as the likelihood of financial distress increases over time.

4

96

Learning Module 4

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
Fixed-Income Markets for Corporate Issuers

Similarities between Long-Term Investment-Grade and
High-Yield Issuance
Both issuers and investors considering (non-callable) long-term debt of different
maturities weigh the relative risk associated with a maturity choice against its costs
or yield-to-maturity. Under normal market conditions, longer maturities are associated with both higher interest rates (yields-to-maturity on government bonds) and
higher credit spreads for a given issuer. This is shown in Exhibit 7 by returning to the
example of BRWA Corporation.

Exhibit 7: Maturity Choices of Long-Term Issuers and Investors
Yield-to-Maturity (%)

BRWA Corporation

3.2%

Government Issuer

2.3%

3y

5y

7y

Maturity

Exhibit 7 shows a partial yield curve for BRWAвҖҷs bonds introduced earlier. Say an
investor with a five-year investment horizon is instead attracted to the higher YTM
of the seven-year BRWA bond. By investing in a bond whose maturity exceeds its
planned investment horizon, the investor takes on the price risk of selling what will be
a two-year bond in five yearsвҖҷ time. Also note that the investor faces reinvestment risk,
or the possibility that prevailing market interest rates at which the investor may invest
funds received are lower than the original bond coupon rate. As an issuer, BRWA may,
in contrast, be attracted to the lower YTM of a potential three-year issuance to fund a
five-year project. However, in doing so, BRWA assumes rollover risk, or the possibility
of having to refinance at higher interest rates when these bonds mature in three years.
While these trade-offs for both investors and issuers exist for investment-grade and
high-yield issuers alike, higher spreads associated with high-yield debt increase the
risk-versus-return trade-off for issuers of lower credit quality. The change in a bondвҖҷs
price for a given change in yield for different maturities and investor returns over a
specific horizon will be addressed in detail in later lessons.

Differences between IG and HY Issuance
The differences between investment-grade and high-yield corporate bonds go well
beyond simply a difference in credit spreads to compensate investors for assuming more
or less default risk. Exhibit 8 summarizes the differences between IG and HY bonds.

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
Long-Term Corporate Debt

Exhibit 8: IG versus HY Bonds
Bond Features
AAA

Lower YTM proportion
due to credit spreads
Fewer issuer restrictions

AA

A

Analytical Approach

Unlikely to default

Use financial ratios and credit
ratings to determine if/when
IG issuerвҖҷs likelihood of
default will change

Bond-like cash flows

BBB

BB

B

Equity-like cash flows

CCC

Higher YTM proportion
due to credit spreads

CC, C, D

Issuer restrictions and/or
bonds secured by assets

Consider likelihood of default
and potential loss given default
given covenants, restrictions
and/or security

More likely to default

Given their strong ability to meet promised interest and principal obligations
from operating cash flows, a significant proportion of the yield-to-maturity on an
investment-grade bond is attributed to the government benchmark yield. High investor
confidence that an IG issuer will be able to make debt service payments over time
from operating cash flows typically allows these borrowers to issue debt with relatively little monitoring from bondholders throughout the debt term. Issuers are able
to take advantage of a high degree of flexibility in choosing debt maturities (usually
up to 30 years), which are accepted by investors with few or no restrictive covenants,
as shown in Exhibit 9.
Exhibit 9: BRWA Restrictive Covenants
Variable
Current Assets

Short-Term
Debt

Permanent
Current Assets
Long-Term
Debt

Lien
Limitations
Long-Term
Assets
Sale Leaseback
Limitations

Equity

3.2% BRWA
Five-Year Notes

97

98

Learning Module 4

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
Fixed-Income Markets for Corporate Issuers

Because BRWAвҖҷs senior unsecured notes rely solely on operating cash flows as
a source of repayment, the restrictions on these investment-grade bonds are
limited to those that broadly protect investor claims to the companyвҖҷs assets by
preventing their sale and leaseback or pledge to a third party.
Investment-grade bonds are relatively standardized debt instruments, and issuers
often have numerous general obligation unsecured bonds outstanding based on similar
terms with different maturities at any given time. The most frequent IG debt issuers
often minimize refinancing risk by staggering debt maturities over time, reducing
rollover risk while preserving the ability to opportunistically raise more debt if market
conditions allow.
High-yield issuers are characterized by a higher expected likelihood of financial
distress, with a higher proportion of a bondвҖҷs YTM attributed to an issuer-specific
spread over the benchmark yield than for IG debt. Given the higher chance of default,
these instruments are more equity-like in nature (i.e., uncertain cash flows) and analysts
place a greater emphasis on the potential loss given default and the protections and
secondary repayment sources that are available. As a result, investors generally impose
more constraints on high-yield issuers. The debt covenants in a bondвҖҷs indenture (or
loan covenants in a loan agreement) establish the ability to monitor issuer financial
performance based on predetermined criteria, allowing lenders to take actions to
restructure debt or preserve creditor claims as needed. Exhibit 10 shows the restrictive
covenants for VIVUвҖҷs 6.5% seven-year callable bonds.
Exhibit 10: VIVU Restrictive Covenants
Revenue
Cost of
Goods Sold
EBITDA

Debt/EBITDA
Restriction
Variable
Current Assets

Depreciation
Debt
Service

Interest Coverage
Ratio Restriction

Taxes
Net Income

Additional Debt
Restrictions

Dividend/Distribution
Restrictions

Pledge of LongTerm Assets

Permanent
Current Assets

Short-Term
Debt

Long-Term
Debt

Long-Term
Assets

6.5% VIVU
Seven-Year
Callable Notes

Equity

In contrast to BRWAвҖҷs IG debtholders, who hold a general obligation unsecured
bond and rely on operating cash flows as the source of repayment, as secured debtholders, VIVU investors hold a claim to specific pledged assets. This secondary
repayment source aims to minimize losses in the more likely event of a default.
The indenture also establishes limitations on additional debt and restrictions
related to the level of debt versus operating cash flows and the distribution of
net income to shareholders.
These investor restrictions and constraints result in far less HY issuer flexibility
and market availability than for IG issuers. For example, VIVUвҖҷs indenture introduced
earlier prohibited the company from issuing additional debt under certain conditions
unless the new debt is either subordinated or consists of short-term working capital
up to 20% of the principal amount of notes outstanding. HY issuers also face limitations on debt maturities, which are typically shorter in maturity (10 years or less) and
face greater fluctuations in both issuer-specific credit spreads and market availability

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
Long-Term Corporate Debt

over the economic cycle. Instead of financing opportunistically as market conditions
allow, HY firms often must restructure debt and renegotiate covenants in order to
take advantage of lower borrowing costs.
Issuers in the high-yield market often seek to retain financial flexibility by borrowing
under leveraged loans with prepayment features or issuing bonds with contingency
features. Recall that issuers of callable debt establish the right to redeem all or part of
a bond prior to maturity at a fixed price. In the earlier VIVU example, the company
issued 6.5% debt for seven years but owned the right to redeem bonds starting three
years after issuance at an initial fixed price of 103.25% of principal. Borrowers who
believe their creditworthiness will improve frequently choose to issue callable debt,
because the value of this contingency feature rises as a firmвҖҷs borrowing costs fall.
Note that high-yield investors also benefit from higher bond prices (lower yields)
as issuer-specific credit spreads fall, but in the case of callable debt, these gains are
capped at the call price. For example, if VIVU were able to issue new debt in three
yearsвҖҷ time with financing cost savings that exceed the 3.25% call premium in present
value terms, it would make sense for VIVU to call the bonds and issue new debt at
a lower YTM. The relationship between the prices and yields of callable bonds and
the different outcomes for high-yield issuers and investors are covered in detail later
in the curriculum.
An important exception in the high-yield bond market is formerly investment-grade
issuers known as вҖңfallen angels,вҖқ introduced earlier. While these borrowersвҖҷ likelihood
of financial distress is similar to that of other high-yield issuers, their outstanding debt
has investment-grade features; that is, it is typically non-callable, with few restrictions and covenants and longer maturities. The reason for this is that the bonds were
issued to investment-grade bond investors at a time when the borrower was highly
rated. The subsequent deterioration in issuer credit quality results in losses to the
original investors, many of whom must divest these bonds because they no longer
meet minimum rating requirements for their portfolios. This can result in significant
price deterioration because the market for high-yield bonds is a fraction of the size
of the market for investment-grade bonds.
QUESTION SET
1. For a given issuer, longer maturities are typically associated with:
A. lower interest rates and lower credit spreads.
B. lower interest rates and higher credit spreads.
C. higher interest rates and higher credit spreads.
Solution:
C is correct. Under normal market conditions, longer maturities are associated with both higher interest rates and higher credit spreads for a given
issuer. A and B are incorrect because longer maturities are typically associated with higher interest rates and higher credit spreads.
2. Which of the following is a reason why a high-yield issuer may elect to issue
equity as opposed to bonds?
A. High-yield bond maturities are limited to 30 years or less.
B. High-yield issuers face numerous restrictions when issuing debt.

99

100

Learning Module 4

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
Fixed-Income Markets for Corporate Issuers

C. High-yield bond analysts use financial ratios and credit ratings to
determine when a high-yield issuerвҖҷs credit rating is likely to change.
Solution:
B is correct. High-yield issuers face numerous restrictions when issuing
debt; however, there are limited restrictions when issuing equity. A is incorrect because high-yield bond maturities tend to be limited to 10 years (not
30 years) or less whereas there is no maturity date on equity. C is incorrect
because investment-grade bond analysts use financial ratios and credit
ratings to determine when an investment-grade issuerвҖҷs credit rating is likely
to change.
3. Relative to investment-grade bonds, high-yield bonds exhibit:
A. less market availability.
B. more bond-like cash flows.
C. fewer constraints by investors.
Solution:
A is correct. Investor restrictions and constraints on HY issuers lead to less
market availability than for IG issuers. B is incorrect because high-yield
bonds exhibit more equity-like cash flows. C is incorrect because high-yield
bonds exhibit more restrictions and constraints by investors.
4. Which of the following statements about high-yield bonds relative to investment-grade bonds is correct?
A. High-yield bonds have more bond-like cash flows.
B. Investment-grade bonds have greater issuer restrictions.
C. High-yield bonds have a higher proportion of YTM attributed to a
credit spread.
Solution:
C is correct. High-yield bonds have a higher proportion of YTM attributed
to a credit spread, while investment-grade bonds have a lower proportion of
YTM attributed to a credit spread. A is incorrect because high-yield bonds
have more equity-like cash flows while investment-grade bonds have more
bond-like cash flows. B is incorrect because investment-grade bonds have
fewer issuer restrictions than high-yield bonds.
5. Which of the following statements about fallen angels is correct?
A. Their outstanding debt has high-yield bond features.
B. Their likelihood of financial distress is similar to that of other highyield issuers.
C. The improvement in issuer credit quality results in gains to the original investors.
Solution:
B is correct. Fallen angelsвҖҷ likelihood of financial distress is similar to that of
other high-yield issuers. A is incorrect because their outstanding debt has
investment-grade (not high-yield) bond features; they are typically non-callable, with few restrictions and covenants and longer maturities. C is incorrect because the deterioration (not improvement) in issuer credit quality
results in losses (not gains) to the original investors, many of whom must
divest these bonds because they no longer meet minimum rating requirements. This can result in significant price deterioration because the high-

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
Long-Term Corporate Debt

yield bond market is a fraction of the size of the investment-grade bond
market.

101

102

Learning Module 4

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
Fixed-Income Markets for Corporate Issuers

PRACTICE PROBLEMS
1. Which of the following is a benefit to a bank that makes short-term loans and
issues asset-backed commercial paper?
A. The bank receives commercial paper when the ABCP is issued.
B. Capital costs are reduced by providing undrawn backup liquidity instead of
holding the short-term loans to maturity.
C. The bank purchases a liquid, short-term note with interest and principal
payments from a short-term loan portfolio to which it would otherwise not
have direct access.
2. Ewing Corp. is a large corporation that has an existing relationship with Sycamore Bank. Ewing is seeking short-term financing from a committed line of
credit; however, Sycamore will offer only an uncommitted line of credit. Which
of the following best supports SycamoreвҖҷs decision?
A. Sycamore will receive an upfront commitment fee on the uncommitted line
of credit.
B. Sycamore will require less bank capital for the uncommitted line than for
the committed line of credit.
C. Sycamore can form a syndicate to reduce the amount of committed capital
needed under an uncommitted line of credit.
3. Assume that today (t = 0) the current US five-year Treasury note trades at a price
equal to the bondвҖҷs face value of USD50,000,000. The security buyer takes delivery of the US Treasury note today and pays the security seller USD50,000,000.
Assume a repo term of 45 days (and 360 days in a year) and a repo rate of 0.375%.
If the buyer agrees to return the five-year Treasury note 45 days from today (t =
T) to the seller, the repurchase price is closest to:
A. USD50,015,625.
B. USD50,023,438.
C. USD50,187,500.
4. A transaction where a hedge fund enters into a repo by taking a short position
in a security with a view that its price will decline relative to the price of another
security held is best described as:
A. a reverse repo.
B. a triparty repo.
C. financing the ownership of a security.
5. Which of the following is not a reason why issuers elect to issue long-term debt
as opposed to short-term debt?
A. More stable funding for short-term activities
B. Lower interest rates for longer maturities for a given issuer

Practice Problems

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.

C. More stable funding for long-term needs, such as capital investments
6. Which of the following statements about high yield is correct?
A. High-yield investors benefit from higher bond prices as issuer-specific credit
spreads fall, but in the case of callable debt, these gains are capped at the
original purchase price.
B. Issuers in the high-yield market seek to retain financial flexibility by borrowing under leveraged loans with prepayment features or issuing bonds with
contingency features.
C. Issuers who believe that their creditworthiness will decline frequently
choose to issue callable debt, because the value of this contingency feature
rises as a firmвҖҷs borrowing costs rise.

103

104

Learning Module 4

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
Fixed-Income Markets for Corporate Issuers

SOLUTIONS
1. B is correct. The bank will reduce capital costs by providing undrawn backup liquidity instead of holding the short-term loans to maturity. A is incorrect
because the bank receives cash when the ABCP is issued, which increases the
bankвҖҷs return. C is incorrect because investors purchase a liquid, short-term note
with interest and principal payments from a short-term loan portfolio to which it
would otherwise not have direct access.
2. B is correct. Committed lines require more bank capital than uncommitted lines,
although commitments of less than a year (usually 364 days) minimize a bankвҖҷs
capital requirement. A is incorrect because Sycamore will receive an upfront
commitment fee on a committed line of credit. C is incorrect because Sycamore
can form a syndicate to reduce the amount of committed capital needed under a
committed line of credit.
3. B is correct. USD50,023,438 is calculated as:
USD50,000,000 Г— [1 + (0.375% Г— 45/360)] = USD50,023,438.
In effect, the security seller borrows USD50,000,000 on a short-term basis at a
low cost, with interest (USD23,438) paid at maturity, because the loan is collateralized by the US Treasury note.
A is incorrect because a repo term of 30 days, as opposed to 45 days, is incorrectly used:
USD50,000,000 Г— [1 + (0.375% Г— 30/360)] = USD50,015,625.
C is incorrect because the repo term and number of days in a year are not used:
USD50,000,000 Г— (1 + 0.375%) = USD50,187,500.
4. A is correct. When viewed from the perspective of the security buyer (cash
lender), a repo transaction is referred to as a reverse repurchase agreement or
reverse repo. B is incorrect because under a triparty repo, both parties agree to
use a third-party agent for the transaction. C is incorrect because financing the
ownership of a security is not the purpose undertaken by the hedge fund.
5. B is correct. Under normal market conditions, longer maturities are associated
with both higher interest rates (yields-to-maturity on government bonds) and
higher credit spreads for a given issuer. A is incorrect because long-term debt
provides more stable funding for short-term activities. C is incorrect because
long-term debt provides more stable funding for long-term needs, such as capital
investments.
6. B is correct. Issuers in the high-yield market often seek to retain financial flexibility by borrowing under leveraged loans with prepayment features or issuing
bonds with contingency features, such as callable debt. A is incorrect because
high-yield investors benefit from higher bond prices as issuer-specific credit
spreads fall, but in the case of callable debt, these gains are capped at the call
price and not the original purchase price. C is incorrect because issuers who
believe that their creditworthiness will not decline frequently choose to issue
callable debt, because the value of this contingency feature rises as a firmвҖҷs borrowing costs fall.

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.

LEARNING MODULE

5

Fixed-Income Markets for
Government Issuers
LEARNING OUTCOMES
Mastery

The candidate should be able to:
describe funding choices by sovereign and non-sovereign
governments, quasi-government entities, and supranational agencies
contrast the issuance and trading of government and corporate
fixed-income instruments

INTRODUCTION
In this module, we complete the review of major fixed-income sectors by focusing on
public sector issuers, including sovereign and non-sovereign governments, and how
they differ from private sector issuers. Sovereign governments are distinguished by
their right to tax within a jurisdiction, while non-sovereign, quasi-government, and
supranational issuers may rely on local taxes, fee-based revenue, or other sources of
repayment. Sovereign debt issuance is usually conducted through scheduled public
auctions, with a different role for financial intermediaries than in private sector issuance. Sovereign debt securities are the most common benchmark securities used in
pricing and valuation analyses for fixed-income instruments.
LEARNING MODULE OVERVIEW
в– 

National or sovereign government issuers are distinguished by
their legal authority to establish and maintain a countryвҖҷs public goods and services, as well as their ability to tax economic activity
in their jurisdictions. Developed market sovereign issues are characterized by a strong, stable, well-diversified domestic economy, and
emerging market sovereign issuers are usually characterized by higher
growth but less stable and less well-diversified economies subject to
greater fluctuations over the economic cycle.

в– 

Sovereign debt issues include short-term securities (with maturities
ranging from 1 to 12 months), medium- and long-term notes and
bonds, and bonds that are guaranteed but not directly issued by the
sovereign government.

1

106

Learning Module 5

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
Fixed-Income Markets for Government Issuers

в– 

Issuance of sovereign debt usually takes the form of a public auction
using standard procedures led by the national treasury or finance ministry, while corporate debt issuances are managed by investment bank
underwriters on behalf of issuers. Sovereign governments designate a
group of financial intermediaries as primary dealers that are required
to participate in all auctions with competitive prices.

в– 

Once a government debt auction is announced, prospective investors
submit competitive or non-competitive bids. Once issued, sovereign
debt is usually traded in a manner similar to private sector debt securities, primarily in OTC markets through financial intermediary broker/
dealers.

в– 

The level and type of non-sovereign government funding vary widely
among countries, depending on whether specific goods and services
are provided and financed at the national, regional, or local level.

в– 

Agencies are quasi-government entities that issue debt in order to
fund the government-sponsored provision of specific public goods or
services based on sovereign or local law. Supranational organizations
are created and supported by sovereign governments in pursuit of a
common objective.

LEARNING MODULE SELF-ASSESSMENT
These initial questions are intended to help you gauge your current level
of understanding of this learning module.
1. Complete the sentence by selecting the correct words from the options
given.
A nationвҖҷs fiscal policy determines the (level/composition) of sovereign debt
through central government spending, and government debt management
policies address the (level/composition) of sovereign debtвҖ”that is, short
term versus long term, as well as other features.
Solution:

A nationвҖҷs fiscal policy determines the level of sovereign debt through
central government spending, and government debt management policies
address the composition of sovereign debtвҖ”that is, short term versus long
term, as well as other features.
2. The issuer ranks bids by prices, choosing bids from highest to lowest until
the desired issuance amount is reached, for:
A. single-price auctions.
B. multiple-price auctions.
C. single-price and multiple-price auctions.
Solution:
C is correct. For both a single-price and a multiple-price auction, the issuer
ranks bids by prices, choosing bids from highest to lowest until the desired
issuance amount is reached.

Sovereign Debt

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.

107

3. Compare the role of financial intermediaries when engaging with sovereign
issuers versus corporate debt issuers.
Solution:

Sovereign issuers engage with financial intermediaries, like corporate debt
issuers, but in a different form. Sovereign governments designate a group of
financial intermediaries as primary dealers that are required to participate
in all auctions with competitive prices, often serve as the central bankвҖҷs
counterparty for open market operations, and facilitate the purchase and
sale of government debt by foreign central banks and other indirect bidders.
Corporate debt issuances, in contrast, are managed by investment bank
underwriters on behalf of issuers.
4. The ability of _______________________ government issuers to access funding across maturities is affected by the predictability and stability of sources
of repayment.
A. Sovereign
B. Non-sovereign
C. Both sovereign and non-sovereign
Solution:
C is correct. Borrowing costs and access to financing for both sovereign and
non-sovereign government issuers are affected by their credit quality.
5. Identify the following statement as true or false. Justify your answer.
Sovereign agencies, such as the Airport Authority of Hong Kong (AAHK)
and the Government National Mortgage Association (Ginnie Mae), benefit
from the full liquidity premium associated with sovereign debt.
Solution:

False. While each of these sovereign agencies is typically able to borrow at a
yield-to-maturity near that of their sovereign guarantor, neither will benefit
from the full liquidity premium associated with sovereign debt.

SOVEREIGN DEBT
describe funding choices by sovereign and non-sovereign
governments, quasi-government entities, and supranational agencies
National or sovereign government issuers are distinguished by their legal authority
to establish and maintain a countryвҖҷs public goods and services and their ability to
tax economic activity in their jurisdiction. Additional sources of repayment for their
debt obligations include tariffs, usage fees, and cash flows from government-owned
enterprises. The size and scope of public goods and services provided by national,
versus regional or local, governments vary widely among markets, as does the degree
of government involvement in the economy. Similar to private sector issuers, a governmentвҖҷs вҖңeconomic balance sheetвҖқ may be used to illustrate the sources and uses
of funding, as shown in Exhibit 1, which also includes activities of the central bank.

2

108

Learning Module 5

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
Fixed-Income Markets for Government Issuers

Exhibit 1: Government вҖңBalance SheetвҖқ

Financial
Balance
Sheet

Short-Term Claims
and Assets

Domestic Currency
Outstanding

Fixed Assets

Short-Term
Debt

вҖ“ Infrastructure
вҖ“ Land
вҖ“ GovernmentOwned Firms

Long-Term Debt
вҖ“ Domestic Currency
вҖ“ Foreign Currency

FX Reserves

Pension and Other
Domestic Obligations

Commodity and
Other Reserves

Supranational and
External Obligations

Claims:
Expected
Future Tax
Revenues

Obligations:
Promised
Future
Expenditures

Borrowed
Capital
(Debt)

Economic
Balance
Sheet

While private issuers prepare and file periodic financial statements in accordance with
generally accepted accounting principles (GAAP), public sector financial accounting
standards vary widely and are often prepared using cash, rather than accrual-based,
principles, typically excluding such items as the depreciation of fixed public goods,
such as federal highways, or the accrual of unfunded liabilities, such as government
pension obligations. In contrast, the economic balance sheet in Exhibit 1 includes
expected future claims and obligations and is therefore of greater relevance for public
versus private sector issuers.
The relative size of the government sector as a proportion of the domestic economy varies widely among nations, and the allocation of these activities between the
national government itself, quasi-government agencies, and local governments also
differs among countries. As a result, this gives rise to non-sovereign issuers based in
the same jurisdiction as the sovereign issuer, a topic discussed in Lesson 3.
A key distinction among national government issuers is the difference between
developed market and emerging market sovereign issuers.
в– 

Developed market (DM) sovereign issuers: DMs are characterized by a
strong, stable, well-diversified domestic economy. DM national government
budgets primarily comprise consistent, recurrent outlays financed with
broad-based individual and business tax cash flows, resulting in stable and
transparent fiscal policy. DM fixed-income securities are denominated in a
major currency commonly held in reserve by foreign governments. These
features allow DM sovereign governments to issue what is often referred to
as default-risk-free debt with unconstrained market access across the maturity spectrum.

в– 

Emerging market (EM) sovereign issuers: EMs are usually characterized by
higher growth but less stable and less well-diversified economies subject
to greater fluctuations over the economic cycle. EMs often depend on a

Sovereign Debt

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.

dominant domestic industry or industries, such as commodities, and may
involve more state-owned or state-controlled enterprises. Central government budget priorities may involve investments to expand economic and
social infrastructure that exceed current domestic tax cash flows, giving
rise to external or supranational funding. EM sovereign debt securities are
often denominated in a restricted domestic currency, or one with limited
convertibility into other currencies due to illiquidity. Currency restrictions
may limit foreign investment and constrain access to longer-term maturities
in domestic currency.
In the case of emerging market sovereign issuers, it is important to further distinguish between domestic debt issued in the domestic currency and external debt,
or debt owed to foreign creditors. Sovereign bonds issued in domestic currency are
often held mostly by domestic financial institutions and other domestic investors.
External debt of emerging and frontier market sovereign issuers comprises debt
from supranational financial organizations and debt issuance denominated in a foreign
currency held by foreign private investors. Earlier modules cited examples of emerging
market sovereign Eurobond issuance, such as RomaniaвҖҷs euro-denominated bond and
the quasi-government PT Indonesia Infrastructure Finance US dollarвҖ“denominated
bond. Investors based in developed markets who purchase these bonds do not face
the same direct currency risk as for domestic currency emerging market sovereign
debt. However, they face indirect exposure to currency fluctuations, because their
returns depend on an issuerвҖҷs ability to generate foreign currency revenue through
international capital, goods, and services flows sufficient to meet foreign currency
interest and principal payments. The following example highlights the case of the
government of Sri LankaвҖҷs external debt.
GOVERNMENT OF SRI LANKA EXTERNAL DEBT
In May 2022, Sri Lanka became the first Asia-Pacific country in many years
to default on its external debt when it failed to make USD78 million in foreign currency interest payments following a 30-day grace period. Sri LankaвҖҷs
government debt rose sharply in the years preceding the default due in large
part to infrastructure projects financed by global debt markets, supranational
agencies, and major trading partners. Total government debt outstanding rose
from 87% of Sri LankaвҖҷs GDP to over 100% in 2020, while both its economy and
foreign currency reserves shrank during that year due to a collapse in tourism
and declining remittances from citizens working abroad. Higher inflation and
commodity prices in the wake of the 2022 war in Ukraine compounded the
countryвҖҷs external debt problems and ultimately led to default.

109

110

Learning Module 5

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
Fixed-Income Markets for Government Issuers

вҖӢ

Sri LankaвҖҷs External Debt, 2021
вҖӢ

India 2%

Other
9%
Japan
10%
Market Debt
47%

China
10%
World Bank
9%

ADB
13%

Note: вҖңMarket DebtвҖқ is primarily international sovereign bonds denominated in US dollars and
owned by foreign private investors, including mutual funds.
Sources: Government of Sri Lanka, Department of External Resources (wwwвҖӢ.erdвҖӢ.govвҖӢ.lk). Lilian
Karunungan and Amelia Pollard, вҖңSri Lanka Falls into Default for the First Time Ever,вҖқ Bloomberg
(19 May 2022). Bank for International Settlements, вҖңDebt Securities Statistics.вҖқ вҖңInfrastructure
Financing in Sri Lanka: Lessons Learnt and Future Collaborations,вҖқ European Institute for Asian
Studies Policy Brief 16/2021.

A nationвҖҷs fiscal policy determines the level of sovereign debt through central
government spending, including both budgetary requirements and debt service costs,
against tax receipts, fees, and revenue from government-owned enterprises or other
sources. Government budget deficits increase the need for borrowing while surpluses
reduce borrowing needs. Forecasts of sovereign debt levels must consider not only
changes in fiscal policy but also the sensitivity of expenditures and revenues to changes
in economic growth and inflation.
Government debt management policies address the composition of sovereign
debtвҖ”that is, short term versus long term, as well as other features. Sovereign debt
issues include the following:
в– 

Short-term securities (with maturities ranging from 1 to 12 months), often
known as Treasury bills, which are usually zero-coupon instruments sold at
a discount to par.

в– 

Medium- and long-term securities often known as Treasury notes and
bonds. Fixed-rate coupon instruments in the domestic currency are most
common, but sovereigns also issue floating-rate, inflation-linked, and foreign
currency instruments.

в– 

While not acting as the issuer, some sovereign governments guarantee certain other instruments that, in effect, make them a type of sovereign debt.
The most prominent example is mortgage-backed securities, especially in
the United States, that conform to certain criteria. Such instruments will be
discussed in detail later.

Given the sovereign right to levy taxes on economic activity, national governments
represent the lowest default risk among domestic currency issuers and are usually the
largest bond issuer in a domestic market.
Recall from earlier in the corporate issuers reading that the ModiglianiвҖ“Miller
(MM) theorem stated that under certain strict conditions, a companyвҖҷs choice of
capital structure is irrelevant in determining the present value of the firmвҖҷs expected
future cash flows. In the case of sovereign government debt, the Ricardian equivalence

Sovereign Debt

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.

theorem introduced in an earlier economics lesson, which was based on similar simplified assumptions, gives an analogous result: a governmentвҖҷs choice of debt maturity
is irrelevant in determining the present value of future tax cash flows.
Under Ricardian equivalence, taxpayers expect government debt to be offset by
higher future taxes, suggesting that a sovereign government should be indifferent
between collecting taxes today or raising debt of any maturity based on the following
assumptions:
в– 

Taxpayers smooth consumption over time, saving expected future taxes
today for future payment.

в– 

Taxpayers form rational expectations that todayвҖҷs tax cuts will result in
future tax increases.

в– 

Capital markets are perfect with no transaction costs, and taxpayers can
freely borrow and lend.

в– 

Taxpayers are altruistic on an intergenerational basis; that is, they pass on
tax savings to descendants.

The relaxation of these Ricardian equivalence assumptions to allow imperfect
capital markets and friction costs between bond investors and taxpayers gives rise to
debt management policies that offer liquidity benefits to investors and other issuers
across the maturity spectrum.
For example, short-term government issuance provides investors with a high
degree of liquidity and safety and often substitutes for bank deposits. Under normal
market conditions, the prices of these very short-term government securities involve
a liquidity premium; that is, their yields-to-maturity will tend to be lower than they
otherwise would be in the absence of this liquidity benefit. While short-term sovereign
debt is typically issued at regular intervals (discussed later) and standard maturities,
government issuers have a high degree of flexibility to alter the size of these periodic
auctions to manage uncertain cash flows, such as near-term tax receipts or unforeseen
funding needs.
Strict adherence to Ricardian equivalence assumptions suggests that governments
should fund themselves with the shortest possible maturity to minimize borrowing
costs and avoid paying any term premium associated with longer-term interest rates.
However, similar to the example of corporate bonds in the prior module, excessive
government reliance on short-term funding introduces rollover risk, or uncertain
refinancing costs, increasing the variability of budget costs and therefore tax rates.
Since taxpayers are unable to perfectly smooth consumption over time nor do they
form rational expectations about current versus future taxes across generations,
fiscal instability creates uncertainty in future tax rates and threatens the stability of
economic growth over time. Therefore, in practice, governments seek to minimize
interest rate and rollover risks by distributing debt across maturities, while issuing
debt in regular, predictable intervals.
Fiscal policies differ significantly across the 38 OECD member countries, but their
sovereign debt maturity structures have shown far less variance. At the end of 2021,
the weighted average maturity across the OECD was just over one year higher than
the average at the end of 2007. Long-term debt represented 85% of total sovereign
debt outstanding, largely unchanged since 2007, while annual issuance was evenly
split between short and long term (short-term debt must be issued more frequently
because it matures sooner). This time frame includes two major recessions and significant sovereign debt issuance.

111

112

Learning Module 5

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
Fixed-Income Markets for Government Issuers

Average Time to Maturity of OECD NationsвҖҷ Sovereign Debt Outstanding
(Years)
8
7
6
5
4

7.4

7.6

2020

2021

6.3

3
2
1
0

2007

Maturity Structure of OECD NationsвҖҷ Sovereign Government Debt
Outstanding (Percent)
100
90

14

19

18

16

14

14

12

11

10

10

10

10

10

86

81

82

84

86

86

88

89

90

90

90

90

2007

2008

2009

2010

2011

2012

2013

2014

2015

2016

2017

2018

16

12

90

84

88

2019

2020

2021

80
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0

Long-term

Short-term

Source: OECD, вҖңOECD Sovereign Borrowing Outlook 2022вҖқ (2022). https://вҖӢdoiвҖӢ.org/вҖӢ10вҖӢ.1787/вҖӢ
b2d85ea7вҖӢ-en.

The use of medium- and long-term sovereign funding issuance must balance the
trade-off of higher borrowing costs with greater fiscal stability, while considering
liquidity or other benefits of issuing bonds with the lowest default risk across the
maturity spectrum.
The benefits of issuing sufficient longer-term sovereign government securities to
maintain liquidity across maturities include the following:
в– 

Establishment of a risk-free benchmark for all debt of specific maturities: The
first fixed-income module demonstrated the use of sovereign bond yields to
calculate an issuerвҖҷs credit risk premium. Government debt policies often
mandate the regular issuance of benchmark securities across maturities to
increase capital market efficiency and transparency for private issuers.

в– 

Use in managing and hedging market interest rate risk: Market participants such as financial intermediaries and asset managers use medium- to
long-term government securities and related derivatives to manage interest
rate risk separately from credit risk.

Sovereign Debt

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.

в– 

Preferred use as collateral in repo and derivative transactions: Longer-term
government securities are the most common form of collateral for both repo
and derivative transactions due to their high degree of liquidity and safety.
Recall from the prior learning module that repurchase agreements offer
security sellers a means of financing and offer security buyers a short-term
collateralized investment with relatively little liquidity or default risk.

в– 

Government bond use in monetary policy and foreign exchange reserves:
Recall from an earlier lesson that central banks use government securities
in fulfilling their monetary policy mandate, which includes the outright
purchase and sale of securities and repo contracts with government bonds
as collateral. Given their high degree of liquidity and safety, foreign market
participants often hold their foreign currency reserves in the form of liquid
foreign government bonds.

While sovereign governments seek to maintain regular and predictable bond
market access across maturities, changes in the amount of debt, the level of deficits,
and the difference between short- and long-term interest rates lead to changes in debt
management policy, as shown in the following example.
THE US TREASURYвҖҷS 30-YEAR BOND
In October 2001, the United States stopped issuing 30-year Treasury bonds due
to cost concerns related to paying interest on the notes. At the time, Treasury
officials saw a reduced need for future borrowing because the U government
was posting a budget surplus. The move stunned the markets and resulted in the
largest one-day price move in years due to supply concerns. In prior years, the
Treasury Department suspended the three- and seven-year issues. The 10-year
Treasury became the de facto benchmark for measuring the performance of
long-term bonds during the suspension of the 30-year bond. Issuance of the
30-year US Treasury bond resumed in February 2006 to cover deficits created
by tax cuts and war spending.
Sources: Wall Street Journal, вҖңYields Plunge after Treasury Halts Issue of 30-Year BondsвҖқ (31
October 2001). wwwвҖӢ.wsjвҖӢ.com/вҖӢarticles/вҖӢSвҖӢB100454296вҖӢ3185681400
TSC Staff, вҖңTreasury to Resume 30-Year Bond on Feb. 9,вҖқ TheStreet (2 November 2005). wwwвҖӢ
.thestreetвҖӢ.com/вҖӢmarkets/вҖӢratesвҖӢ-andвҖӢ-bonds/вҖӢtreasuryвҖӢ-toвҖӢ-resumeвҖӢ-30вҖӢ-yearвҖӢ-bondвҖӢ-onвҖӢ-febвҖӢ-9вҖӢ-10250971

QUESTION SET
1. Identify the following statement as true or false. Justify your answer.
Emerging market external sovereign debt is denominated in a foreign
currency.
Solution:

False. Although EM sovereigns do issue debt in foreign currencies to
increase demand by foreign investors who desire less currency risk, many
EM sovereigns have external debt denominated in their domestic currency
as well, especially those with currencies that have exhibited exchange rate
stability.

113

114

Learning Module 5

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
Fixed-Income Markets for Government Issuers

2. US-based investors of US dollarвҖ“denominated external sovereign debt can
still face exposure to currency risk because:
A. sovereign fixed-income securities are denominated in freely floating
domestic currencies.
B. the issuerвҖҷs credit rating may be downgraded.
C. the issuer must be able to generate foreign currency revenue.
Solution:
C is correct. Investors based in developed markets who purchase external
debt of emerging and frontier market sovereign issuers face indirect exposure to currency fluctuations, because their returns depend on an issuerвҖҷs
ability to generate foreign currency revenue to meet foreign currency
interest and principal payments through international capital, goods, and
services flows.
3. Explain why national governments represent the lowest default risk among
domestic currency issuers.
Solution:

National governments are distinguished by their sovereign right to generate
tax cash flows from economic activity within a jurisdiction, unlike private
sector issuers that rely on operating cash flows and secondary sources of
repayment, such as asset sales, to service debt obligations.
4. Due to their high degree of liquidity and safety, the most common form of
collateral for both repo and derivative transactions is:
A. shorter-term government securities.
B. medium-term government securities.
C. longer-term government securities.
Solution:
C is correct. Longer-term government securities are the most common
form of collateral for both repo and derivative transactions due to their high
degree of liquidity and safety.
5. A sovereign government faced with growing deficits and concerns about
rollover risk would most likely:
A. lower tax rates.
B. stop servicing the debt.
C. issue medium- to long-term securities.
Solution:
C is correct. Government budget deficits increase the need for borrowing
at a higher level while surpluses reduce borrowing needs. Excessive government reliance on short-term funding introduces rollover risk, or uncertain
refinancing costs, increasing the variability of budget costs and therefore
tax rates. Therefore, in practice, governments seek to minimize interest
rate and rollover risks by distributing debt across maturities while issuing
debt in regular, predictable intervals. A is incorrect because taxes should be
raised, not lowered, in such a scenario. B is incorrect because such an action
would put the government in default, with severe consequences for its credit
standing and its ability to meet fiscal policy commitments.

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
Sovereign Debt Issuance and Trading

SOVEREIGN DEBT ISSUANCE AND TRADING
contrast the issuance and trading of government and corporate
fixed-income instruments
In contrast to the opportunistic nature of corporate debt issuance managed by investment bank underwriters on behalf of issuers, issuance of sovereign debt usually takes
the form of a public auction led by the national Treasury or finance ministry.
Once a government debt auction is announced, prospective investors submit
competitive or non-competitive bids. A competitive bidder specifies an acceptable
price and number of securities to be purchased. If the price determined at auction is
above the bid, a competitive bidder will not be offered any securities. In contrast, a
non-competitive bidder agrees to accept the price determined at auction and always
receives securities.
A competitive bid process is either a single-price auction or multiple-price
auction. In both cases, the issuer ranks bids by prices, choosing bids from highest to
lowest until the desired issuance amount is reached. Under a single-price auction, all
winning bidders pay the same price and receive the same coupon rate for the bonds
regardless of their bid. In contrast, a multiple-price auction process generates different prices among bidders for the same bond issue. The single-price auction process
may result in a lower cost of funds and broader distribution among investors, while
multiple-price auctions may result in a narrower distribution of large bids because
investors must accept bonds at their bid price.
A single-price auction process has four phases:
1. The auction is announced by the government debt management office,
which includes information about the bond issue, such as the amount and
type of securities being offered, the auction and issue dates, the maturity
date of the bonds, and bidding times.
2. Dealers, institutional investors, and individuals make bids. Bids can be competitive or non-competitive.
3. All non-competitive bids are accepted while competitive bids are ranked
starting at the lowest yield (highest bond price). The highest yield that fills
the offering amount, counting from the bottom, is the вҖңcut off.вҖқ All securities
are sold for a single price, using this stop yield. Competitive bidders who bid
higher than this yield (lower price) do not purchase any securities. Results
are announced publicly, as shown in Exhibit 2.
4. Securities are delivered to the non-competitive and winning competitive
bidders in exchange for proceeds.
Exhibit 2: 30-Year Singapore Government Bond Auction Announcement and
Results
On 8 September 2021, the Monetary Authority of Singapore announced an
auction of SGD2.6 billion of 30-year Singapore government bonds.
The Monetary Authority of Singapore
21 September 2021
Application for Taxable Book-Entry Singapore Government Bonds
Tenor:

Total Amount Offered:

Approximately 30 Years
SGD2,600,000,000

115

3

116

Learning Module 5

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
Fixed-Income Markets for Government Issuers

The Monetary Authority of Singapore
21 September 2021
Application for Taxable Book-Entry Singapore Government Bonds
Issue/Settlement Date:

Maturity Date Amount:

1 October 2021
1 October 2051

Coupon Rate:

To be determined based on the cut-off yield of successful
applications

Yield and Price:

To be determined at the auction

Coupon Payment Dates:
Method of Sale:

1 October and 1 April
Uniform-price auction

Bids must be submitted through primary dealers.

The results were announced shortly after the auction on 28 September 2021.
The Monetary Authority of Singapore
28 September 2021
Results of Auction of Taxable Book-Entry Singapore Government Bonds to Be Issued
1 October 2021
Tenor:

Total amount allotted:
Amount allotted to
non-competitive bids:
Total amount of bids:
Coupon rate:

Cut-off yield and price:

Median yield and price:

Average yield and price:
Total amount of bids:

Approximately 30 years
SGD2,600,000,000
SGD207,355,000
SGD4,105,487,000
1.875% p.a.
1.95% p.a. and 98.303
1.89% p.a. and 99.658
1.84% p.a. and 100.804
SGD4,105,487,000

The yield-to-maturity and price determined at this auction (the вҖңCut-off yield and
priceвҖқ) was 1.95% and 98.303% of par. The Monetary Authority of SingaporeвҖҷs
auction rules states that the bond coupon rate will be the cut-off yield rounded
down to the nearest 0.125%, or 1.875%. This auction attracted bids totaling
SGD4.1 billion, over 1.5Г— the offer amount.
GOVERNMENT OF INDIA SWITCHES FROM MULTIPLE-PRICE TO SINGLE-PRICE
DEBT AUCTIONS
In July 2021, the central bank of India (Reserve Bank of India) moved from multiple- to single-price auctions for its 2-year, 3-year, 5-year, 10-year, 14-year, and
floating-rate bonds. The 30-year and 40-year bonds continued to be auctioned
via the multiple-price method. The Reserve Bank of India changed the methodology it uses for government bond issuance after it faced several partially failed
auctions. Under the single-price auction, volatility in yields is reduced because
all successful bidders receive the same rate.
Sources: BQ Prime, вҖңRBI Tweaks Government Bond Auction Strategy amid Falling SalesвҖқ (2 July
2021). wwwвҖӢ.bloombergquintвҖӢ.com/вҖӢbusiness/вҖӢrbiвҖӢ-tweaksвҖӢ-governmentвҖӢ-bondвҖӢ-auctionвҖӢ-strategyвҖӢ-amidвҖӢ
-fallingвҖӢ-sales.
Subhadip Sircar, Suvashree Ghosh, and Ronojoy Mazumdar, вҖңRBI Proposes Framework for
Acceptable Bids at Auctions to Underwriters,вҖқ Bloomberg (2 July 2021). wwwвҖӢ.bloombergвҖӢ.com/вҖӢ
news/вҖӢarticles/вҖӢ2021вҖӢ-07вҖӢ-02/вҖӢrbiвҖӢ-saidвҖӢ-toвҖӢ-proposeвҖӢ-acceptableвҖӢ-bidsвҖӢ-atвҖӢ-auctionsвҖӢ-toвҖӢ-underwriters.

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
Sovereign Debt Issuance and Trading

Sovereign issuers also engage with financial intermediaries, such as corporate
debt issuers, but in a different form. Sovereign governments designate a group of
financial intermediaries as primary dealers that are required to participate in all
auctions with competitive prices, often serve as the central bankвҖҷs counterparty for
open market operations and facilitate the purchase and sale of government debt by
foreign central banks and other indirect bidders. Investors may also participate directly
in auctionsвҖ”for example, through the UK Debt Management Office or TreasuryDirect
in the United States.
Once issued, sovereign debt is usually traded in a manner similar to that of private
sector debt securities primarily on OTC markets by financial intermediary broker/
dealers, although in some markets, such as Australia, they are traded on an exchange.
In each market, the sovereign issuer is often the largest borrower and their securities
are the most liquid among fixed-income instruments. The most recently issued sovereign debt securities, known as on-the-run securities, are used for benchmark yield
analyses because they are more liquid than previously issued off-the-run securities,
which trade infrequently. Given their liquidity, some trading of on-the-run securities
occurs electronically, on centralized marketplaces operated by private companies.
A significant difference in trading between sovereign and corporate debt is the
presence of investors in sovereign debt with varying вҖңnon-economicвҖқ objectives. For
example, major investors in US Treasuries include the Federal Reserve, which uses
Treasuries in the conduct of monetary policy; major foreign governments, which hold
the securities as US dollar reserves; state and local governments, which face restrictions
on holding other types of securities; and banks and insurance companies that either
must hold Treasuries or are incentivized to do so to meet regulatory requirements.
These factors reduce sovereign borrowing costs versus the private sector and are most
pronounced for sovereign issuers with a reserve currency, a currency held by global
central banks in significant quantities and widely used to conduct international trade
and financial transactions. In addition to the US dollar, the euro, Japanese yen, British
pound, Swiss franc, Australian dollar, and Chinese renminbi are reserve currencies.
However, the US dollar accounts for 60% of global foreign exchange reserves and
about half of international trade, international loans, and global debt securities and
is involved in nearly 90% of all FX market transaction.1
QUESTION SET
1. An advantage of a single-price auction versus a multiple-price auction is that a single-price auction may result in a:
A. lower cost of funds and broader distribution among investors.
B. narrower distribution of large bids because investors must accept
bonds at their bid prices.
C. ranking of bids by prices, where bids from highest to lowest are chosen
until the desired issuance amount is reached.
Solution:
A is correct. The single-price auction process may result in a lower cost of
funds and broader distribution among investors. B is incorrect because multiple-price auctions may result in a narrower distribution of large bids because investors must accept bonds at their bid price. C is incorrect because
in both cases, the issuer ranks bids by prices, choosing bids from highest to
lowest until the desired issuance amount is reached.
1 Congressional Research Service, вҖңThe U.S. Dollar as the WorldвҖҷs Dominant Reserve CurrencyвҖқ (15
September 2022). https://вҖӢcrsreportsвҖӢ.congressвҖӢ.gov/вҖӢproduct/вҖӢpdf/вҖӢIF/вҖӢIF11707.

117

118

Learning Module 5

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
Fixed-Income Markets for Government Issuers

2. Discuss how the type of auction (single price or multiple price) can impact
the success of auctions and yield volatility.
Solution:

A multiple-price auction process generates different prices among bidders
for the same bond issue. Under a single-price auction, volatility in yields is
reduced because all successful bidders receive the same rate. The Reserve
Bank of India changed the methodology it uses (from multiple price to single price) for government bond issuance after it faced a number of partially
failed auctions.
3. A significant difference in trading between sovereign and corporate debt is:
A. the presence of investors in sovereign debt with varying вҖңnon-economicвҖқ objectives.
B. the opportunistic nature of sovereign debt issuance managed by
investment bank underwriters on behalf of issuers.
C. that sovereign debt is usually traded on an exchange while private sector debt primarily trades on OTC markets mediated by broker/dealers.
Solution:
A is correct. A significant difference in trading between sovereign and
corporate debt is the presence of investors in sovereign debt with varying
вҖңnon-economicвҖқ objectives. For example, major investors in US Treasuries include the Federal Reserve, which uses Treasuries in the conduct of
monetary policy; major foreign governments, which hold the securities as
US dollar reserves; state and local governments, which face restrictions on
holding other types of securities; and banks and insurance companies that
either must hold Treasuries or are incentivized to do so to meet regulatory
requirements. B is incorrect because in contrast to the opportunistic nature
of corporate debt issuance managed by investment bank underwriters on
behalf of issuers, sovereign auctions use standard procedures to ensure
broad distribution among investors under a transparent price discovery
process. C is incorrect because once issued, sovereign debt is usually traded
in a manner similar to that of private sector debt securities: primarily on
OTC markets mediated by broker/dealers, although in some markets, such
as Australia, they are traded on an exchange.

4

NON-SOVEREIGN, QUASI-GOVERNMENT, AND
SUPRANATIONAL AGENCY DEBT
describe funding choices by sovereign and non-sovereign
governments, quasi-government entities, and supranational agencies
The level and type of non-sovereign government funding vary widely among countries,
depending on whether specific public goods and services are provided and financed
at the national, regional, or local level. Some non-sovereign government issuers are
similar to sovereign borrowers in that they can levy taxes to fund activities in their
jurisdiction. Other non-sovereign issuers rely on national government budget allocations or user fees to meet interest and principal payments with or without the explicit

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
Non-Sovereign, Quasi-Government, and Supranational Agency Debt

financial support of a national or local government as a secondary repayment source.
The ability of non-sovereign issuers to access funding across maturities is affected by
the predictability and stability of these sources of repayment, which are key determinants of the issuerвҖҷs credit quality.

Government Agencies
Government agencies are quasi-government entities that issue debt in order to fund
the government-sponsored provision of specific public goods or services based on
sovereign or local law. This may involve the financing of specific activities promoted
by the government or the operation of necessary infrastructure as mandated by
law. For example, the Airport Authority of Hong Kong (AAHK), introduced in an
earlier module, is the statutory agency for operating and developing the Hong Kong
International Airport. AAHK issues a combination of short- and long-term debt to
meet the airportвҖҷs specific working capital and capital investment needs. The primary
source of repayment is cash flows from airport operations, while its sovereign government backing is a secondary source of repayment.
The Government National Mortgage Association (known as Ginnie Mae, not to be
confused with Fannie Mae or Freddie Mac) securitizes and guarantees certain mortgage loans in the United States to subsidize and promote home ownership. Ginnie
Mae issues callable agency debt securities to finance its operations with maturities
matching the expected cash flows of its guaranteed mortgages. The primary source
of repayment for the agencyвҖҷs debt are mortgage-based guaranty fees and other cash
flows with its sovereign government backing as a secondary source of repayment.
Both AAHK and Ginnie Mae issue debt with maturities and structures consistent
with their respective underlying activities. That said, while each of these sovereign
agencies is typically able to borrow at a yield-to-maturity near that of their sovereign
guarantor, neither will benefit from the full liquidity premium associated with sovereign debt outlined in the prior lesson.

Local and Regional Government Authorities
Non-sovereign government authorities may either issue debt for general purposes,
which is repaid from local tax cash flows, or issue debt to fund specific projects or
infrastructure, which is repaid from user fees or other cash flows directly derived from
the project. The former are referred to as general obligation bonds (GO bonds), which
are used to fund public goods and services in the non-sovereignвҖҷs limited jurisdiction,
such as the Province of Ontario green bond issue described in the term sheet below.
These unsecured bonds are repaid with tax revenues from the provincial government,
though their use of proceeds is limited to eligible green projects.
Province of Ontario 1.55% 2029 Global Green Bonds
Key Terms
Issuer:

Settlement Date:
Maturity Date:

Principal Amount:
Interest:

Interest Payment:

Province of Ontario (Canada)
July 29, 2021
November 1, 2029
CAD2,750,000,000
1.55% p.a.
Semi-annually on May 1 and November 1 of each year

119

120

Learning Module 5

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
Fixed-Income Markets for Government Issuers

Province of Ontario 1.55% 2029 Global Green Bonds
Key Terms
Other Relevant
Features:

An amount equal to the net proceeds of the Bonds will be
recorded in a designated account in the Province of OntarioвҖҷs
financial records. This designated account will be used to track
the use of and allocation of proceeds to вҖңEligible Projects,вҖқ which
include projects in the following sectors:
1. Clean transportation
2. Energy efficiency and conservation
3. Clean energy and technology
4. Forestry, agriculture, and land management
5. Climate adaptation and resilience

Revenue bonds, in contrast, are issued for specific project financing (infrastructure
such as roads, bridges, or tunnels) with the source of repayment often linked to a
projectвҖҷs revenue stream (tolls, fees, etc.). Revenue bonds usually involve longer-dated
funding, the maturity of which often matches the expected life of matching project
cash flows.

Supranational Organizations
Supranational organizations, such as the World Bank, International Monetary Fund
(IMF), and Asian Development Bank (ADB), are created and supported by sovereign
governments as member states in pursuit of a common objective, such as fostering
economic cooperation and development, promoting trade, or providing financing to
emerging economies in pursuit of sustainable growth. Member states typically share
decision-making authority and provide implicit and explicit financial support to these
organizations, resulting in the highest credit quality among these issuers and a strong
ability to access capital markets across maturities. In other cases, supranational and
sovereign organizations partner to form quasi-government agencies that can issue
debt at a lower cost than an emerging market sovereign government. For example,
PT Indonesia Infrastructure Finance (IIF) was introduced in an earlier lesson as a US
dollarвҖ“denominated issuer in the Eurobond market. IIFвҖҷs ability to access this and
similar markets is derived from indirect Indonesian government ownership and the
strong financial support from a consortium of public sector entities, including the
Asian Development Bank, the World Bank GroupвҖҷs International Finance Corporation
(IFC), and the German sovereign government development bank (Kreditanstalt fГјr
Wiederaufbau, or KfW).
Supranational issuers target bond investors in major currencies using global bond
markets. In the example bond issue below, the Asian Development Bank borrowed in
Indonesian rupiah (IDR) but will pay interest and principal to investors in US dollars.
The amounts are fixed in Indonesian rupiah, with the payments in US dollars determined using the spot USD/IDR rate two days prior to each payment date, so investors
are still assuming currency risk.
Asian Development Bank 7.80% Global Medium-Term Notes due 15 March 2034
Key Terms
Issuer:

Settlement Date:
Maturity Date:

Principal Amount:
Interest:

Asian Development Bank
18 March 2019
15 March 2034
IDR1,200,000,000,000 payable in US dollars
7.80% p.a.

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
Non-Sovereign, Quasi-Government, and Supranational Agency Debt

Asian Development Bank 7.80% Global Medium-Term Notes due 15 March 2034
Key Terms
Interest Payment:

Semi-annually on 15 March and 15 September each year

Listing:

Luxembourg Stock Exchange

Governing Law:

New York

Other Relevant
Features:

The interest and principal amounts will be paid on each Interest
Payment Date in US dollars converted from Indonesian rupiah at
the applicable Reference Rate (as defined) on the Rate Fixing Date
(as defined).

QUESTION SET
1. Which of the following features is typical of revenue bonds? Revenue bonds typically:
A. provide shorter-dated funding.
B. fund general local government spending.
C. have maturities matching the expected life of matching project cash
flows.
Solution:
C is correct. Revenue bonds usually involve longer-dated funding, the maturity of which often matches the expected life of matching project cash flows.
A is incorrect because revenue bonds usually involve longer-dated funding.
B is incorrect because revenue bonds fund specific projects while general
obligation bonds fund local governments generally.
2. The Asian Development Bank is an example of a:
A. government agency.
B. non-sovereign government.
C. supranational organization.
Solution:
C is correct. Supranational organizations, such as the World Bank, IMF, and
ADB, are created by several sovereign governments in pursuit of a common objective, such as fostering economic cooperation and development,
promoting trade, or providing financing to emerging economies in pursuit
of sustainable growth. A is incorrect because government agencies are
subunits of governments formed to carry out specific laws or objectives. B is
incorrect because non-sovereign governments preside over subdivisions of
countries (e.g., the province of Ontario in Canada) through constitutional or
legislative authority.
3. Member states of a supranational organization typically share decision-making authority and provide implicit and explicit financial support to the organization, resulting in which of the following levels of credit quality among
these issuers?
A. Lowest

121

122

Learning Module 5

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
Fixed-Income Markets for Government Issuers

B. Average
C. Highest
Solution:
C is correct. Member states typically share decision-making authority and
provide implicit and explicit financial support to these organizations, resulting in the highest credit quality among these issuers and a strong ability to
access capital markets across maturities.

Practice Problems

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.

PRACTICE PROBLEMS
1. Balance sheets of government entities are unlikely to include:
A. FX reserves.
B. long-term debt.
C. accrual of unfunded liabilities.
2. In practice, which of the following applies as it relates to sovereign government
financing?
A. Taxpayers smooth consumption over time, saving expected future taxes
today for future payment.
B. Taxpayers form rational expectations that todayвҖҷs tax cuts will result in
future tax increases and pass on tax savings to descendants.
C. Governments seek to minimize interest rate and rollover risks by distributing debt across maturities while issuing debt in regular, predictable intervals.
3. Which of the following is correct regarding the single-price auction process?
A. Bidders include only dealers and institutional investors.
B. Competitive bidders who bid higher than the stop yield are allocated
securities.
C. All non-competitive bids are accepted, while competitive bids are ranked
starting at the lowest yield (highest bond price).
4. On-the-run sovereign debt securities are:
A. used for benchmark yield analyses.
B. issued prior to off-the-run securities.
C. less liquid than off-the-run securities.
5. A non-sovereign bond issued to fund public goods and services in the
non-sovereignвҖҷs limited jurisdiction that is repaid from local tax cash flows is
referred to as:
A. a GO bond.
B. a revenue bond.
C. an agency bond.
6. Government agencies issue debt that is:
A. at a yield-to-maturity equal to that of its sovereign guarantor.
B. primarily repaid by cash flows related to its underlying activities.
C. short term, only to meet working capital and capital investment needs.

123

124

Learning Module 5

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
Fixed-Income Markets for Government Issuers

SOLUTIONS
1. C is correct. Public sector financial accounting standards vary widely and are often prepared using cash, rather than accrual-based, principles, typically excluding
such items as the depreciation of fixed public goods, such as federal highways,
or the accrual of unfunded liabilities, such as government pension obligations.
A and B are incorrect because balance sheets of government entities are likely to
include FX reserves and long-term debt.
2. C is correct. Governments seek to minimize interest rate and rollover risks by
distributing debt across maturities while issuing debt in regular, predictable
intervals. A and B are incorrect because taxpayers are neither able to perfectly
smooth consumption over time, nor do they form rational expectations about
current versus future taxes across generations, leading to fiscal instability, creating uncertainty in future tax rates, and threatening the stability of economic
growth over time.
3. C is correct. All non-competitive bids are accepted, while competitive bids are
ranked starting at the lowest yield (highest bond price). A is incorrect because
individuals can also bid, in addition to dealers and institutional investors. B is
incorrect because competitive bidders who bid higher than the stop yield (lower
price) do not purchase any securities. All securities are sold for a single price,
using a stop yield.
4. A is correct. The most recently issued sovereign securities, known as on-the-run
securities, are used for benchmark yield analyses. B is incorrect because
off-the-run securities are issued prior to on-the-run securities. C is incorrect
because on-the-run securities are not less liquid than off-the-run securities.
5. A is correct. General obligation bonds are used to fund public goods and services in the non-sovereignвҖҷs limited jurisdiction and are repaid from local tax
cash flows. B is incorrect because revenue bonds are issued for a specific project
financing (infrastructure such as roads, bridges, or tunnels) with the source of
repayment often linked to a projectвҖҷs revenue stream (tolls, fees, etc.). C is incorrect because government agencies are quasi-government entities that issue debt
in order to fund the government-sponsored provision of specific public goods or
services based on sovereign or local law, with the primary source of repayment
related to the public good or service and the sovereign government backing as a
secondary source of repayment.
6. B is correct. For the Airport Authority of Hong Kong, for example, the primary
source of repayment is cash flows from airport operations, while its sovereign
government backing is a secondary source of repayment. Similarly, the primary
source of repayment for Ginnie Mae is mortgage-based guaranty fees and other
cash flows, with its sovereign government backing as a secondary source of
repayment. A is incorrect because while sovereign agencies typically borrow at a
yield-to-maturity near that of their sovereign guarantor, they do not benefit from
the full liquidity premium associated with sovereign debt. C is incorrect because
agencies issue a combination of short- and long-term debt to meet specific working capital and capital investment needs.

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.

LEARNING MODULE

6

Fixed-Income Bond Valuation:
Prices and Yields
LEARNING OUTCOMES
Mastery

The candidate should be able to:
calculate a bondвҖҷs price given a yield-to-maturity on or between
coupon dates
identify the relationships among a bondвҖҷs price, coupon rate,
maturity, and yield-to-maturity
describe matrix pricing

INTRODUCTION
We will now use discounted cash flow analysis to calculate bond prices and show
how the discount rate used as well as a bondвҖҷs features, such as its coupon rate and
time-to-maturity, affect pricing. The price of a bond and its future cash flows can be
used calculate an internal rate of return, known as the yield-to-maturity, which serves
as a useful return measure for fixed-income investors under certain assumptions. One
of these assumptions that applies to this learning module is that all bond interest and
principal cash flows occur as promised. We will explore the relationship between
bond prices and bond features, showing how different features affect a bondвҖҷs price,
and demonstrate pricing both on and between bond coupon dates. Finally, we will
introduce matrix pricing, which uses comparable bonds to estimate a bondвҖҷs price
and yield-to-maturity when neither is known.
Most of the examples and exhibits used throughout the reading can be downloaded
as a Microsoft Excel workbook. Each worksheet in the workbook is labeled with the
corresponding example or exhibit number in the text.
LEARNING MODULE OVERVIEW
в– 

Bond pricing is an application of discounted cash flow analysis.
Bond prices are a function of a bondвҖҷs features, including its
cash flows and the interest rate(s) used to discount future cash flows.

в– 

By comparing a bondвҖҷs price to its face value or its coupon rate to the
discount rate, we can identify whether a bond is trading at a discount,
at par, or at a premium.

1

126

Learning Module 6

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
Fixed-Income Bond Valuation: Prices and Yields

в– 

If the market price of a bond is known, an internal rate of return
on the cash flows can be calculated, known as the yield-to-maturity
(YTM). The YTM is the single interest rate that equates the present
value of future cash flows to the price of the bond.

в– 

A bond investorвҖҷs rate of return will equal the YTM if (1) the investor
holds the bond to maturity, (2) the issuer makes full coupon and principal payments on the scheduled dates, and (3) the investor reinvests
all coupon payments at the same YTM.

в– 

When a bond is priced or traded in between coupon dates, an additional amount must be added for interest that has accrued since the
last coupon payment, to compensate the seller, since the buyer will
receive the entire next coupon payment.

в– 

To calculate a bondвҖҷs accrued interest on any date, we multiply the
coupon by the fraction of days elapsed in the coupon period divided
by the total days in the coupon period. There are various conventions
for counting these days; two common conventions are actual/actual
and 30/360.

в– 

A bondвҖҷs price changes inversely with changes in its YTM. A bondвҖҷs
features determine price sensitivity to changes in YTM.

в– 

The lower the coupon rate on a fixed-coupon bond, the greater the
percentage price change for a given change in the bondвҖҷs yield-to-maturity. Generally, the longer a bondвҖҷs time-to-maturity, the greater its
percentage price change for a given change in its yield-to-maturity.

в– 

Unlike listed equity securities, most bonds are thinly traded, which
complicates price discovery.

в– 

Matrix pricing is a price estimation process for new or illiquid bonds
that uses yields on securities with the same or similar features. Matrix
pricing is widely used in price quotations for bonds.

LEARNING MODULE SELF-ASSESSMENT
These initial questions are intended to help you gauge your current level
of understanding of the learning module.
1. A corporate bond that matures on 1 January 2035 pays semiannual coupons
of 3.25% per year and has a face value of 100. The market discount rate is
4.0%. For a trade settlement date of 1 January 2030, the price of the bond as
a percentage of par value, assuming a 30/360 day count, is closest to:
A. 96.632.
B. 96.661.
C. 103.436.
Solution:
A is correct. The bond price is the sum of the coupon and principal payments discounted at the market discount rate.

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.

Introduction

PV = PMT1/(1 + r)1 + PMT2/(1 + r)2 + вҖҰ + (PMTN + FVN)/(1 + r)N,
where
PMT =1.625
r = 0.02
FV = 100
N = 10
1.625

1.625

1.625

1.625

1.625

вҖӢ+ _
вҖӢ
вҖӢ+ _
вҖӢ
вҖӢ+ _
вҖӢ
вҖӢ+ _
вҖӢ
вҖӢ+
PV = _
вҖӢ
вҖӢ(1 + 0.02)вҖӢ1вҖӢ вҖӢ(1 + 0.02)вҖӢ2вҖӢ вҖӢ(1 + 0.02)вҖӢ3вҖӢ вҖӢ(1 + 0.02)вҖӢ4вҖӢ вҖӢ(1 + 0.02)вҖӢ5вҖӢ вҖӢ
	вҖӢ
вҖҜвҖҜвҖҜвҖҜвҖҜвҖҜ
вҖӢ
1.625
1.625
1.625
1.625
101.625
_
	вҖӢ
вҖӢ+ _
вҖӢ
вҖӢ+ _
вҖӢ
вҖӢ+ _
вҖӢ
вҖӢ+ _
вҖӢ
вҖӢ
вҖӢ(1 + 0.02)вҖӢ6вҖӢ вҖӢ(1 + 0.02)вҖӢ7вҖӢ вҖӢ(1 + 0.02)вҖӢ8вҖӢ вҖӢ(1 + 0.02)вҖӢ9вҖӢ вҖӢ(1 + 0.02)вҖӢ10вҖӢ

	вҖӢPV = 96.632.вҖӢ
Note: Quantities in the calculation are not rounded, though they are shown
with three decimal places for presentation purposes. Solutions are rounded
to three decimal places.
The calculation can also be done using the PV or PRICE functions in Microsoft Excel and Google Sheets:
=-PV(rate, nper, pmt, [FV], type)
=-PV(0.02,10,1.625,100,0)
= 96.632
=PRICE(settlement, maturity, rate, yield, redemption, frequency, [basis])
=PRICE(DATE(2030,1,1),DATE(2035,1,1),0.0325,0.04,100,2)
= 96.632
2. Which of the following is not required for a bond investorвҖҷs rate of return on
a bond investment to equal the bondвҖҷs YTM?
A. The bond is held to maturity.
B. The issuer may default on one, but only one, coupon payment.
C. Coupon payments are reinvested at the same rate as the YTM.
Solution:
B is correct. For a bond investor to earn the YTM, the issuer must make all
coupon and principal payments on their scheduled dates.
A is incorrect because a bond investor does have to hold the bond to maturity to earn the YTM.
C is incorrect because a bond investor does have to reinvest coupons at the
same rate as the YTM to earn the YTM.
3. A three-year sovereign bond issued on 1 January 2030 pays semiannual coupons of 1.5% per year on 30 June and 31 December each year and has a face
value of 100. The market discount rate is 2.0%. For a trade settlement date

127

128

Learning Module 6

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
Fixed-Income Bond Valuation: Prices and Yields

of 29 August 2031, the flat price of the bond as a percentage of par value,
assuming an actual/actual day count, is closest to:
A. 99.343.
B. 99.587.
C. 99.832.
Solution:
A is correct. The flat price is the full price less accrued interest. The full
price is the present value as of the trade settlement date, which involves
partial payment periods because weвҖҷre between coupon dates.
PMT + FV
вҖӢ1 + r вҖӢ
вҖӢ

	вҖӢP вҖӢVвҖӢFullвҖӢ = _
вҖӢ( PMT
вҖӢ+ _
вҖӢ( PMT
вҖӢ+ вӢҜ + _
вҖӢ(
вҖӢ.вҖӢ
) 1вҲ’t/T
) 2вҲ’t/T
) NвҲ’t/T
вҖӢ1 + r вҖӢ

вҖӢ

вҖӢ1 + r вҖӢ

вҖӢ

Here,
PMT = 0.75
r = 0.01
t = 60 (days from 30 June 2031 to 29 August 2031)
T = 184 (days from 30 June 2031 to next coupon on 31 December 2031)
FV = 100
N=3
0.75
вҖӢ(1 + 0.01)вҖӢ

0.75
вҖӢ(1 + 0.01)вҖӢ

100.75
вҖӢвҖӢ(1 + 0.01)вҖӢ

__________________________
вҖӢвҖҜвҖҜ
	вҖӢP вҖӢVвҖӢFullвҖӢ = _____________
1вҲ’60/184 вҖӢ+ вҖӢвҖҜвҖҜ
2вҲ’60/184 вҖӢвҖҜвҖҜ
3вҲ’60/184 вҖӢ
вҖӢ

вҖӢ

	вҖӢP вҖӢVвҖӢFullвҖӢ = 99.587.вҖӢ
Accrued interest is the proportional share of the next coupon payment owed
the seller.
	вҖӢAI = _
вҖӢT вҖӢГ— PMT,вҖӢ
t

60

	вҖӢAI = вҖӢ_
184 вҖӢГ— 0.75вҖӢ
	вҖӢAI = 0.245.вҖӢ
The flat price is 99.587 вҖ“ 0.245 = 99.343.
The present value calculations can also be done easily on spreadsheet
software. Additionally, the PRICE function in Microsoft Excel and Google
Sheets can be used to directly solve for the flat price (note: not full prices).
=PRICE(settlement, maturity, rate, yield, redemption, frequency, [basis])
=PRICE(DATE(2031,8,29),DATE(2032,12,31),0.015,0.02,100,2)
= 99.343.
4. True or false: A bondвҖҷs quoted price is also called its full price because it is
the amount that the buyer pays the seller.
A. True

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
Bond Pricing and the Time Value of Money

129

B. False
Solution:
False. A bond is quoted by its flat price. The full price is the amount paid by
the buyer to the seller, and it includes accrued interest if settlement does not
occur on a coupon payment date.
5. Assume that the Japanese government issues two non-callable fixed-coupon
bonds on the same date with the same coupon rate. The bonds are identical
except that one matures in 10 years and the other matures in 30 years. If the
relevant market discount rates for both bonds rise by 65 bps, which of the
following will be true?
A. The 10-year bond will have a larger percentage price change than the
30-year bond.
B. The 10-year bond will have a smaller percentage price change than the
30-year bond.
C. The 10-year bond and the 30-year bond will have equal percentage
price changes.
Solution:
B is correct. Generally, for the same coupon rate, a shorter-term bond will
have a smaller percentage price change than a longer-term bond when their
relevant market discount rates change by the same amount.
A is incorrect because generally a shorter-term bond will have a smaller percentage price change than a longer-term bond when their market discount
rates change by the same amount.
C is incorrect because shorter-term bonds and longer-term bonds will not
have the same percentage price changes when their market discount rates
change by the same amount.
6. True or false. Justify your answer.
Matrix pricing is an estimation process in which quotes from derivative
markets (e.g., interest rates swaps) are used to determine the price of illiquid
or new bonds for which transactional data are scarce.
A. True
B. False
Solution:
False. Matrix pricing is a process for estimating prices of illiquid or newly
issued bonds using prices of comparable bonds, not from transactions in
derivative markets. The comparable bonds have similar times-to-maturity,
coupon rates, and credit quality as those of the bond under study.

BOND PRICING AND THE TIME VALUE OF MONEY
calculate a bondвҖҷs price given a yield-to-maturity on or between
coupon dates

2

130

Learning Module 6

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
Fixed-Income Bond Valuation: Prices and Yields

Bond Pricing with a Market Discount Rate
Bond pricing is an application of discounted cash flow analysis that depends on a
bondвҖҷs cash flow features and the rate (or rates) used for discounting. Recall from
an earlier lesson that the price of the bond at issuance is the present value of the
promised interest and principal cash flows. The market discount rate is used in the
time-value-of-money calculation to obtain the present value. The market discount
rate is the rate of return required by investors given the risk of the bond investment.
It is also called the required yield, or the required rate of return.
The present value (PV) calculation for each bond coupon cash flow (PMT) that
occurs in t periods with a market discount rate of r per period should be familiar from
an earlier time-value-of-money lesson:
PV(Bond coupon) = PMTt/(1 + r)t.

(1)

Equation 2 extends this calculation in a general formula for calculating a bond
price (PV) given the market discount rate on a coupon date:
PV = PMT1/(1 + r)1 + PMT2/(1 + r)2 + вҖҰ + (PMTN + FVN)/(1 + r)N,

(2)

where FV is equal to the bondвҖҷs face value and N is the number of periods to
maturity.
Recall the Bright Wheels Automotive (BRWA) bond introduced in an earlier
lesson. The bondвҖҷs price was 100% of face or par value because the market discount
rate, r, and the bondвҖҷs fixed coupon rate, PMT, were equal (at 3.2% per annum, or
1.6% semiannually). We will now consider cases where the bondвҖҷs coupon rate and
the market discount rate are not equal.
EXAMPLE 1

BRWA Par, Discount, and Premium Bond
вҖӢ

Period:

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

Cash Flow:

1.6

1.6

1.6

1.6

1.6

1.6

1.6

1.6

1.6

101.6

1.6

1.6

1.5

1.5

1.5

1.5

1.5

1.5

1.4

90.2

1.6

1.5

1.5

1.5

1.5

1.4

1.4

1.4

86.7

1.5

1.5

1.5

1.4

1.4

1.4

1.4

1.3

83.3

PV of Cash Flow at 1.2% periodic YTM:
Bond price (sum):

103.75

PV of Cash Flow at 1.6% periodic YTM:
Bond price:

1.6
100.00

PV of Cash Flow at 2.0% periodic YTM:

1.6

Bond price:

96.41
вҖӢ

Note: Please refer to the candidate learning ecosystem online for a spreadsheet of these calculations in the downloaded Microsoft Excel workbook.

If the market discount rate rises to 2% semiannually, new bonds to be issued at
par must provide coupon rates that are also 2% semiannually. The previously
issued BRWA bond pays coupons at a 1.6% rate, so it should have a lower price
than a bond that pays 2%. We could say that the BRWA bondвҖҷs 1.6% coupon rate
is deficient relative to the higher 2% market discount rate. The market price of
the BRWA bond, with its lower coupon, will therefore fall below 100% of par.
Example 1 shows that when we discount the BRWA bond cash flows at a market
discount rate of 2%, we calculate a price of 96.41. This lower price compensates
for a coupon rate below the market discount rate. When a bondвҖҷs price is less

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
Bond Pricing and the Time Value of Money

than 100, we say that the bond trades at a discount. (This use of вҖңdiscountвҖқ when
referring to the bond price is not connected to the use of вҖңdiscountвҖқ in market
discount rates). Exhibit 1 illustrates a bond trading at a discount.
вҖӢ

Exhibit 1: Discount Bond Cash Flows
вҖӢ

100
вҖңDeficientвҖқ coupon = 0.4
At market (par) coupon = 2.0

PV of discount bond
= 96.41 < par

1.6 1.6 1.6 1.6 1.6 1.6 1.6 1.6 1.6 1.6

PV of
par bond
= 100

PV of вҖңdeficientвҖқ coupon
= 3.59

We now consider how the price of the existing BRWA bond will change if the
market discount rate falls to 1.2%. A similar bond (five-year maturity, semi-annual
coupon) issued when the five-year market discount rate is 1.2% semiannually
will also have a semi-annual coupon rate of 1.2% so that its price will be 100% of
par. Because the BRWA bond pays a higher coupon rate of 1.6%, its price should
be higher than that of a bond that pays only 1.2%. We could say that the BRWA
bondвҖҷs 1.6% coupon rate is excessive relative to the lower 1.2% market discount
rate. Therefore, the BRWA bondвҖҷs price rises as the market discount rate falls.
When we discount the cash flows of the BRWA bond at the market discount
rate of 1.2% and then add them up, we calculate a bond price equal to 103.73%
of par. It has a higher price than the 1.2% coupon bond because it pays a higher
coupon. Exhibit 2 illustrates a bond trading at a premium.
вҖӢ

Exhibit 2: Premium Bond Cash Flows
вҖӢ

100
Periodic coupon = 1.6
вҖңExcessвҖқ coupon = 0.4
At market (par) coupon = 1.2

PV of discount bond
= 103.75 > par

1.2 1.2 1.2 1.2 1.2 1.2 1.2 1.2 1.2 1.2

PV of
par bond
= 100
PV of
вҖңexcessвҖқ
coupon
= 3.75

The PV function in Microsoft Excel or Google Sheets may also be used for
the price calculation:

131

132

Learning Module 6

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
Fixed-Income Bond Valuation: Prices and Yields

=PV(rate, nper, pmt, FV, type),
where
rate is the market discount rate per period
nper is the number of periods
pmt is the periodic coupon payment
FV is future or face value
type corresponds to payments made at the end (0) or beginning (1) of each
period
The discount, premium, and par relationships are summarized in Exhibit 3.
вҖӢ

Exhibit 3: Fixed-Rate Discount, Premium, and Par Bonds
вҖӢ

вҖӢ

Bond Price

Price vs. Future Value

Coupon vs. Market Discount Rate

PV = FV

PMT = Market discount rate

Par
Discount

PV < FV

PMT < Market discount rate

Premium

PV > FV

PMT > Market discount rate
вҖӢ

The interest rates per period are annualized by multiplying the rate per period
by the number of periods in a year. Therefore, an equivalent statement is that
the BRWA bond is priced at a premium because its stated annual coupon rate
of 3.2% is greater than the stated annual market discount rate of 2.4%. Unless
stated otherwise, interest rates are typically quoted as annual rates.

Yield-to-Maturity
If the market price of a bond is known, Equation 2 can be used to calculate its
yield-to-maturity. The yield-to-maturity is the internal rate of return on the cash
flowsвҖ”the uniform interest rate such that when the future cash flows are discounted
at that rate, the sum of the present values equals the price of the bond. It is an implied
or observed single market discount rate.
A bond investor will earn a rate of return on a bond equal to its YTM if each of
the following is true:
1. The investor holds the bond to maturity.
2. The issuer makes full coupon and principal payments on scheduled dates.
The YTM is the promised yieldвҖ”that is, assuming no issuer default.
3. The investor reinvests all coupon payments at the same YTM.
For example, say we observe that the five-year 3.2% fixed-rate BRWA bond in
Example 1 is priced at 108.15. The yield-to-maturity is the solution for the rate, r, in
the following equation:
108.15 = 1.6/(1 + r)1 + 1.6/(1 + r)2 + вҖҰ + 101.6/(1 + r)10.

The Microsoft Excel or Google Sheets YIELD function may be used for bonds that
pay periodic interest:

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
Bond Pricing and the Time Value of Money

=YIELD(settlement, maturity, rate, pr, redemption, frequency, [basis]) where
settlement is the settlement date entered using the DATE function
maturity is the maturity date entered using the DATE function
rate is the semi-annual (or periodic) coupon
pr is the price per 100 face value
redemption is the future value at maturity
frequency is the number of coupons per year
[basis] is the day-count convention, typically 0 for US bonds (30/360 day
count).
If we assume the BRWA bond settles and matures on 15 October 2025 and
15 October 2030, respectively, the appropriate entries are DATE(2025,10,15) and
DATE(2030,10,15). The other entries are rate = 1.6%, pr = 108.15, redemption = 100,
frequency = 2, and basis = 0, as follows:
=YIELD(DATE(2025,10,15),DATE(2030,10,15),1.6%,108.15,100,2,0)
Given a price of 108.15, the YIELD function calculates the annual yield-to- maturity for the BRWA bond to be 1.50%. Additionally, since the yield-to-maturity is an
internal rate of return, we can also use the IRR function in Microsoft Excel or Google
Sheets to get the same result.
Yield-to-maturity, commonly referred to as вҖңyield,вҖқ is often used interchangeably
with the market discount rate or required yield and in place of discussing bond prices.
For example, market participants will simply say вҖңyields are risingвҖқ rather than вҖңmarket
discount rates are risingвҖқ or вҖңbond prices are falling.вҖқ
BONDS WITH NEGATIVE YIELDS-TO-MATURITY
The yield-to-maturity on a bond may be positive, zero, or negative. Yields on
many sovereign bonds fell below zero following accommodative monetary policies introduced by central banks starting in 2012 in response to below-target
inflation rates. Bonds with a negative yield-to-maturity include those issued at
higher yields in the past that have experienced significant price appreciation and
newly issued zero-coupon sovereign government bonds priced at a premium to
par value. Bonds are generally not issued with negative coupons.
In 2020, China issued its first ever negative-yielding sovereign bond denominated in euros, with terms shown in Exhibit 4.
вҖӢ

Exhibit 4: PeopleвҖҷs Republic of China Eurobond
вҖӢ

вҖӢ

PeopleвҖҷs Republic of China Zero-Coupon Bond
Brief Summary of Terms
Issuer:

PeopleвҖҷs Republic of China

Settlement Date:

November 25, 2020

Maturity Date:

November 25, 2025

Principal Amount:

EUR 750 million

Interest:

Zero coupon (ACT/ACT day count)

Issuance Price:

100.763

Issuance Spread:

+30 bps p.a. plus Mid Swaps

133

134

Learning Module 6

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
Fixed-Income Bond Valuation: Prices and Yields

PeopleвҖҷs Republic of China Zero-Coupon Bond
Brief Summary of Terms
Issuance and Trading:

Eurobond
Listed on Multiple Exchanges
Euroclear/ Clearstream

Seniority:

Senior Unsecured

Exchanges:

Luxembourg
вҖӢ

The Excel YIELD function cannot not be used for zero-coupon bonds. Instead,
we solve for the annualized yield-to-maturity using Equation 1 for the single
cash flow of par (PMT = 100) after five years (t = 5) at the original issuance
price (PV = 100.763):
вҖӢ.
PV = _
вҖӢвҖӢ(1PMT
+ r)вҖӢtвҖӢ
вҖӢ

100
вҖӢ(1 + r)вҖӢ вҖӢ

100.763 = _
вҖӢ
5 вҖӢ.
вҖӢвҖӢвҖӢ	вҖӢвҖҜвҖҜ
вҖӢвҖӢ
вҖҜвҖҜ
вҖҜвҖҜ
вҖӢ
_
вҖӢ15 вҖӢ

r = вҖӢ(_
вҖӢ100.763 вҖӢ)вҖӢ вҖӢвҲ’ 1.
100

вҖӢ
r = вҲ’ 0.15 % .

The Financial Times reported high demand for this negative-yielding Chinese
bond since its yield was more than 50 bps above that of European sovereign
bondsвҖ”the five-year German bund was at approximately вҖ“0.74% around the same
time вҖ”and more generally because many investors sought portfolio exposure to
China amid a relative scarcity of euro-denominated Chinese bonds at the time.

Flat Price, Accrued Interest, and the Full Price
When a bond is priced between coupon payment dates, its price has two components:
the flat price (PVFlat) and the accrued interest (AI). The sum of the parts is the full
price (PVFull), which also is known as the invoice or вҖңdirtyвҖқ price.
PVFull = PVFlat + AI.вҖӮ	

(3)

The flat price, which is the full price minus the accrued interest, is also called the
quoted or вҖңcleanвҖқ price and is the type of price usually quoted by bond dealers. If a
trade takes place, the accrued interest is added to the flat price to obtain the full price
paid by the buyer and received by the seller on the trade settlement date. The trade
settles when the bond buyer pays and the seller delivers the security.
The flat price is used for quotations to avoid misleading investors about a bondвҖҷs
market price trend. If full prices were quoted by dealers, investors would see price rises
each day even if the YTM did not change due to the accrual of interest. Once a coupon
payment is made, the quoted price would drop significantly, as shown in Exhibit 5.

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
Bond Pricing and the Time Value of Money

Exhibit 5: Flat Price, Accrued Interest, and Full Price
Bond Price
Full Price = Flat Price + Acrued Interest
Full Price

Coupon
Payment

Accrued
Interest

Flat Price
1

2

3

4

Period

The accrued interest is the portion of the next coupon payment owed to the seller of
a bond, because although the seller held the bond for a partial coupon period, the full
coupon will be received by the buyer. To calculate accrued interest, we determine the
fractional amount by counting the days in the period. If the coupon period has T days
between payment dates and t days have passed since the last payment, the accrued
interest is calculated using Equation 4:
	вҖӢAI = _
вҖӢT вҖӢГ— PMT,вҖӢ	
t

(4)

where
t = number of days from the prior coupon payment to the settlement date
T = number of days in the coupon period
t/T = fraction of coupon period that has passed since the prior payment
PMT = coupon payment per period
Note that the accrued interest portion of the full price does not depend on the
yield-to-maturity. Therefore, it is only the flat price that is affected by a change in
interest rates.
There are multiple approaches for day counting (or вҖңday countsвҖқ). The day count
is specified by two parameters: how days are counted within a given period and
the number of days assumed per period. Two common day count conventions are
30/360 and actual/actual. The 30/360 day count assumes each month has exactly 30
days (although most donвҖҷt) and each year has exactly 360 days (although none do). In
contrast, the actual/actual day count convention assumes the actual number of days
in each month and the actual number of days in a year.
EXAMPLE 2

Actual/Actual vs. 30/360 Day Count
Consider two otherwise identical bonds that pay 4.375% semiannual interest
on 15 May and 15 November of each year. One is a government bond with an
actual/actual day count and the other is a corporate bond with a 30/360 day
count. The actual/actual method uses the actual number of days, including
weekends, holidays, and leap days. The 30/360 method assumes 30 days in a
month and 360 days in each year.
Calculate accrued interest for settlement on 27 June for both bonds.

135

136

Learning Module 6

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
Fixed-Income Bond Valuation: Prices and Yields

Accrued interest for the actual/actual bond is the actual number of days
between 15 May and 27 June (t = 43 days) divided by the actual number of days
between 15 May and 15 November (T = 184 days), times the coupon payment.
For the 30/360 bond, we 42 days between 15 May and 27 June: 15 days
between 15 May and 30 May and 27 days between 1 June and 27 June (31 May
is not counted in the 30/360 convention). There are assumed to be 180 days in
the six-month period between 15 May and 15 November.
вҖӢ

Actual/Actual Bond

30/360 Bond

Days (t)

43

42

Period (T)

184

180

t/T

0.233696

0.233333

вҖӢ

Accrued interest is calculated as follows:
Actual/actual bond:AI = (43/184) Г— (4.625/2)
= 0.540421 per 100 of par value.
30/360 bond:AI = (42/180) Г— (4.625/2)
= 0.539583 per 100 of par value.
The full price of a fixed-rate bond between coupon payments given the market
discount rate per period (r) is the present value of future cash flows as of the trade
settlement date, as shown in Equation 5:
PMT + FV
вҖӢ1 + r вҖӢ
вҖӢ

	вҖӢP вҖӢVвҖӢFullвҖӢ = _
вҖӢ( PMT
вҖӢ+ _
вҖӢ( PMT
вҖӢ+ вӢҜ + _
вҖӢ(
вҖӢ.вҖӢ	
) 1вҲ’t/T
) 2вҲ’t/T
) NвҲ’t/T
вҖӢ1 + r вҖӢ

вҖӢ

вҖӢ1 + r вҖӢ

вҖӢ

(5)

This is very similar to Equation 2. The difference is that the next coupon payment
(PMT) is discounted for the remainder of the coupon period, which is 1 вҖ“ t/T. The
second coupon payment is discounted for that fraction plus another full period, 2 вҖ“ t/T.
Equation 5 is simplified by multiplying both the numerator and denominator by
the expression (1 + r)t/T. The result is Equation 6:
P вҖӢVвҖӢFullвҖӢ = [вҖӢ _
вҖӢ( PMT) 1 вҖӢ+ _
вҖӢ PMT вҖӢ+ вӢҜ + _
вҖӢ(
вҖӢ вҖӢГ— вҖӢ(1 + r)вҖӢt/TвҖӢ
вҖӢ 1 + r)вҖӢNвҖӢ ]
вҖӢ 1 + r вҖӢ вҖӢ вҖӢ(1 + r)вҖӢ2вҖӢ
	вҖӢвҖҜвҖҜвҖҜвҖҜвҖҜ
вҖӢ	 вҖӢ
= PV Г— вҖӢ(1 + r)вҖӢt/TвҖӢ.
PMT + FV

(6)

An advantage of Equation 6 is that the expression in the brackets, PV, is easily
obtained using the Excel YIELD function because there are N evenly spaced periods.
PV here is the present value of future cash flows as of the last coupon date; it is identical to Equation 2 but is not the same as PVFlat.
The next two examples demonstrate the calculation of a bondвҖҷs flat price, accrued
interest, and full price.
EXAMPLE 3

BRWA BondвҖ”Flat and Full Price
Calculate the flat price and full price of the 3.2% fixed BRWA bond 90 days after
the first coupon payment.
First, we calculate the bondвҖҷs present value on the coupon date that begins
the period during which settlement occurs, using Equation 2 or the PV function
in Microsoft Excel or Google Sheets.
=-PV(rate, nper, pmt, [FV], type)

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
Bond Pricing and the Time Value of Money

=-PV(0.02,9,1.60,100,0)
= 96.735
Next, we calculate the full price by counting the days using the specified day
count convention and using Equation 6.
Number of days from beginning of period until settlement, t = 90
Number of days in the period containing settlement, T = 180
	вҖӢP вҖӢVвҖӢFullвҖӢ = PV Г— вҖӢ(1 + r)вҖӢt/TвҖӢ
	вҖӢP вҖӢVвҖӢFullвҖӢ = 96.735 Г— (вҖӢ 1 + 0.02)вҖӢ90/180вҖӢ
	вҖӢP вҖӢVвҖӢFullвҖӢ = 97.698вҖӢ
Then we use Equation 4 to calculate accrued interest.
	вҖӢAI = вҖӢ_
T вҖӢГ— PMTвҖӢ
t

90

	вҖӢAI = вҖӢ_
180 вҖӢГ— 1.60вҖӢ
	вҖӢAI = 0.80вҖӢ
Finally, we calculate the flat price using Equation 3 by subtracting the accrued
interest from the full price.
	вҖӢP вҖӢVвҖӢFullвҖӢ = P вҖӢVвҖӢFlatвҖӢ+ AIвҖӢ
	вҖӢP вҖӢVвҖӢFlatвҖӢ = P вҖӢVвҖӢFullвҖӢвҲ’ AIвҖӢ
	вҖӢP вҖӢVвҖӢFlatвҖӢ = 97.698 вҲ’ 0.80вҖӢ
	вҖӢP вҖӢVвҖӢFlatвҖӢ = 96.898вҖӢ
Note: Quantities in the calculation are not rounded, though they are shown
with three decimal places for presentation purposes. Solutions are rounded to
three decimal places.
EXAMPLE 4

Romania BondвҖ”Flat and Full Price
The 4.625% EUR annual, actual/actual fixed-coupon bond issued by Romania
maturing 3 April 2049 was introduced in an earlier lesson. Calculate the full price
(PVFull), the accrued interest (AI), and the flat price (PVFlat) for settlement on
15 December 2031 assuming an annual yield-to-maturity on that date of 3.50%.
Solution
Step 1

Calculate PV as of the beginning of the current coupon period for the
settlement date:

=-PV(rate, nper, pmt, [FV], type)
=-PV(0.035,18,4.625,100,0)
= 114.838
Step 2

Calculate the actual number of days (t):

137

138

Learning Module 6

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
Fixed-Income Bond Valuation: Prices and Yields

вҖӢ

Days

Months

15

December

27

April

30

June, September, November

31

May, July, August, October

256

Total
вҖӢ

Step 3

Calculate the actual number of days in the coupon period (T):
вҖӢ

Date at beginning of period

4/3/2031

Date at end of period

4/3/2032

Actual number of days in period

366
вҖӢ

Notice that 2032 is a leap year so it has an extra day.
Step 4

Use Equation 6 to solve for PVFull:
_t

	вҖӢP вҖӢVвҖӢFullвҖӢ = PV Г— вҖӢ(1 + r)вҖӢвҖӢT вҖӢвҖӢ.вҖӢ
256
_

	вҖӢP вҖӢVвҖӢFullвҖӢ = 114.838 Г— вҖӢ(1 + 0.035)вҖӢвҖӢ366 вҖӢвҖӢ.вҖӢ
	вҖӢP вҖӢVвҖӢFullвҖӢ = 117.635.вҖӢ
Step 5

Use Equation 4 to solve for accrued interest:

t
	вҖӢAI = вҖӢ_
T вҖӢГ— PMT.вҖӢ
256

	вҖӢAI = вҖӢ_
366 вҖӢГ— 4.625.вҖӢ
	вҖӢAI = 3.235.вҖӢ
Step 6

Use Equation 3 to solve for PVFlat:

	вҖӢP вҖӢVвҖӢFullвҖӢ = P вҖӢVвҖӢFlatвҖӢ+ AI.вҖӢ
	вҖӢP вҖӢVвҖӢFlatвҖӢ = P вҖӢVвҖӢFullвҖӢвҲ’ AI.вҖӢ

	вҖӢP вҖӢVвҖӢFlatвҖӢ = 117.635 вҲ’ 3.235.вҖӢ
	вҖӢP вҖӢVвҖӢFlatвҖӢ = 114.400.вҖӢ
Note: Quantities in the calculation are not rounded, though they are shown
with three decimal places for presentation purposes. Solutions are rounded to
three decimal places.
KNOWLEDGE CHECK
1. Define yield-to-maturity.
Solution:

Yield-to-maturity is the internal rate of return on a bondвҖҷs cash flowsвҖ”the
uniform interest rate such that when the future cash flows are discounted at
that rate, the sum of the present values equals the price of the bond.

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
Bond Pricing and the Time Value of Money

2. A non-callable fixed-coupon bond with a maturity in 10 years and a face value of 100 is issued with an annual coupon rate of 2.8% when the applicable
market discount rate is also 2.8%. The price of this bond at issuance is:
A. less than 100.
B. exactly 100.
C. more than 100.
Solution:
B is correct. When a bond is issued with a coupon rate that equals the market discount rate, it is priced at par.
3. A non-callable fixed-coupon bond with a maturity in 10 years and a face
value of 100 has an annual coupon rate of 2.8%, while the market discount
rate is 4.0%. The price of this bond at issuance is:
A. less than 100.
B. exactly 100.
C. more than 100.
Solution:
A is correct. A bond with a coupon rate lower than the market discount
rate will trade at a discount to par, to compensate for its вҖңdeficientвҖқ coupons
relative to the market rate.
4. A sovereign bond that matures on 1 January 2030 pays an annual coupon
of 1.2% and has a face value of 100. For a trade settlement date of 1 January
2020, the bonds are priced at 128. Calculate the yield-to-maturity as of the
settlement date and price.
Solution:

вҖ“1.390%. We use the YIELD function in Microsoft Excel or Google Sheets:
=YIELD(settlement, maturity, rate, pr, redemption,
frequency,[basis])
=YIELD(DATE(2020,1,1),DATE(2030,1,1),0.012,128,100,1)
= -1.390%

5. A bond with a face value of 100 pays an annual coupon of 12% and matures
on Ad14 August 2007. It uses the actual/actual day count convention. For a
settlement date of 23 December 2002 and an annual YTM of 9.75%, calculate the full price, accrued interest, and flat price. Assume an actual/actual
day count.
Solution:

Step 1

Calculate PV as of the beginning of the current coupon period for the
settlement date:

=-PV(rate, nper, pmt, [FV], type)
=-PV(0.0975,5,12,100,0)
= 108.584

139

140

Learning Module 6

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
Fixed-Income Bond Valuation: Prices and Yields

Step 2

Calculate the actual number of days (t):
вҖӢ

Month

Days

August

17

September

30

October

31

November

30

December

23

Total

131
вҖӢ

Step 3

Calculate the actual number of days in the coupon period (T):
вҖӢ

Date at beginning of period

8/14/2002

Date at end of period

8/14/2003

Actual number of days in period

365
вҖӢ

Step 4

Use Equation 6 to solve for PVFull:
_t

	вҖӢP вҖӢVвҖӢFullвҖӢ = PV Г— вҖӢ(1 + r)вҖӢвҖӢT вҖӢвҖӢ.вҖӢ
131
_

	вҖӢP вҖӢVвҖӢFullвҖӢ = 108.584 Г— вҖӢ(1 + 0.0975)вҖӢвҖӢ365 вҖӢвҖӢ.вҖӢ
	вҖӢP вҖӢVвҖӢFullвҖӢ = 112.271.вҖӢ
Step 5

Use Equation 4 to solve for accrued interest:

t
	вҖӢAI = вҖӢ_
T вҖӢГ— PMT.вҖӢ
131

	вҖӢAI = вҖӢ_
365 вҖӢГ— 12.вҖӢ
	вҖӢAI = 4.307.вҖӢ
Step 6

Use Equation 3 to solve for PVFlat:

	вҖӢP вҖӢVвҖӢFullвҖӢ = P вҖӢVвҖӢFlatвҖӢ+ AI.вҖӢ
	вҖӢP вҖӢVвҖӢFlatвҖӢ = P вҖӢVвҖӢFullвҖӢвҲ’ AI.вҖӢ

	вҖӢP вҖӢVвҖӢFlatвҖӢ = 112.271 вҲ’ 4.307.вҖӢ
	вҖӢP вҖӢVвҖӢFlatвҖӢ = 107.964.вҖӢ
Note: Quantities in the calculation are not rounded, though they are shown
with three decimal places for presentation purposes. Solutions are rounded
to three decimal places.
6. Perform the same calculations for the same bond in Question 5, but use a
30/360 day count convention.
Solution:

Step 1

Calculate PV as of the beginning of the current coupon period for the
settlement date:

=-PV(rate, nper, pmt, [FV], type)
=-PV(0.0975,5,12,100,0)

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
Relationships between Bond Prices and Bond Features

141

= 108.584
Step 2

Calculate the number of days (t):
вҖӢ

Month

Days

August

16

September

30

October

30

November

30

December

23

Total

129
вҖӢ

Step 3

Assume the number of days in the coupon period (T) is 360.

Step 4

Use Equation 6 to solve for PVFull:
_t

	вҖӢP вҖӢVвҖӢFullвҖӢ = PV Г— вҖӢ(1 + r)вҖӢвҖӢT вҖӢвҖӢ.вҖӢ
129
_

	вҖӢP вҖӢVвҖӢFullвҖӢ = 108.584 Г— (вҖӢ 1 + 0.0975)вҖӢвҖӢ360 вҖӢвҖӢ.вҖӢ
	вҖӢP вҖӢVвҖӢFullвҖӢ = 112.265.вҖӢ
Step 5

Use Equation 4 to solve for accrued interest:

	вҖӢAI = вҖӢ_
T вҖӢГ— PMT.вҖӢ
t

129

	вҖӢAI = вҖӢ_
360 вҖӢГ— 12.вҖӢ
	вҖӢAI = 4.300.вҖӢ
Step 6

Use Equation 3 to solve for PVFlat:

	вҖӢP вҖӢVвҖӢFullвҖӢ = P вҖӢVвҖӢFlatвҖӢ+ AI.вҖӢ
	вҖӢP вҖӢVвҖӢFlatвҖӢ = P вҖӢVвҖӢFullвҖӢвҲ’ AI.вҖӢ

	вҖӢP вҖӢVвҖӢFlatвҖӢ = 112.265 вҲ’ 4.300.вҖӢ
	вҖӢP вҖӢVвҖӢFlatвҖӢ = 107.965.вҖӢ
Note: Quantities in the calculation are not rounded, though they are shown
with three decimal places for presentation purposes. Solutions are rounded
to three decimal places.

RELATIONSHIPS BETWEEN BOND PRICES AND BOND
FEATURES
identify the relationships among a bondвҖҷs price, coupon rate,
maturity, and yield-to-maturity

3

142

Learning Module 6

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
Fixed-Income Bond Valuation: Prices and Yields

Inverse Relationship
As seen in the prior lesson, the price of a fixed-rate bond will change as the interest
rate used to discount future cash flows changes. For any time-value-of-money calculation, a higher discount rate results in a lower present value for any fixed future
cash flow and a lower discount rate results in a higher present value. Therefore, bond
yields-to-maturity and prices move in opposite directions.

Coupon Effect
The size of bond coupon cash flows affects how much a bondвҖҷs price will change for
a given yield change for bonds of the same maturity. The lower a bondвҖҷs coupon, the
higher the proportion of total cash flow that occurs at maturity. Discounting this final
cash flow by the factor of (1 + r)N as shown in Equation 2 magnifies the impact of a
given change in r relative to bonds whose final cash flow is a smaller proportion of
the total. This coupon effect is best demonstrated by comparing the extreme case of
a zero-coupon bond (with 100% of cash flows including cumulative interest paid at
maturity) with an otherwise identical fixed-coupon bond, as in the following example.
EXAMPLE 5

Yield Change Effect for Zero-Coupon vs. Coupon Bond
Assume an investor has the choice between the 4.625% fixed-coupon 30-year
Romania Eurobond priced at par and an otherwise identical zero-coupon bond
from the same issuer at the same yield-to-maturity of 4.625%.
Calculate the percentage change in price for both bond alternatives if YTM
rises or falls by 100 bps upon issuance.
Use Equation 1 (zero-coupon bond) and the Excel or Google Sheets PV
function (4.625% coupon bond) to calculate and compare these changes. Please
refer to the candidate learning ecosystem online for a spreadsheet of these calculations in the downloaded Microsoft Excel workbook.
вҖӢ

Face Value

100

Periods / year

1

Number of
periods

30

Coupon payment

Change

YTM

4.625

Prices
Coupon

Zero

Price Changes
Coupon

Zero

Percentage Price
Changes
Coupon

Zero

--

0.04625 100.000

25.759

--

--

--

--

0.01

0.05625

85.665

19.364

вҖ“14.335

вҖ“6.395

вҖ“14.34%

вҖ“24.83%

вҖ“0.01

0.03625 118.107

34.361

18.107

8.601

18.11%

33.39%

вҖӢ

For the same time-to-maturity, a lower-coupon (or zero-coupon) bond has
a greater percentage price change than a higher-coupon bond when market
discount rates change by the same amount.

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
Relationships between Bond Prices and Bond Features

Maturity Effect
The time-to-maturity of a bond also affects a bondвҖҷs price/yield relationship. Generally,
all else equal, a longer-term bond has a greater percentage price change than a
shorter-term bond when the market discount rates change by the same amount. The
maturity effect is the result of the higher N in Equation 2 for the longer-maturity bond.
EXAMPLE 6

Yield Change Effect for Different Maturities
Assume an investor has a choice between Bond A, with a 1.5% fixed coupon
and a 30-year maturity priced at par, and Bond B, a 10-year, 1.5% fixed-coupon
bond priced at par from the same issuer.
Calculate the percentage change in price for these if YTM rises or falls by
100 bps upon issuance.
Compare the price changes in the 10-year and 30-year bonds using the PV
function to calculate and compare these changes. Please refer to the candidate
learning ecosystem online for a spreadsheet of these calculations in the downloaded Microsoft Excel workbook.
вҖӢ

Bond

A

B

Face Value

100

100

Price

100

100

Coupon Rate

0.015

0.015

Coupon Payment

1.50

1.50

Maturity

30

10

100 bps rise in YTM
YTM

0.025

Price

79.070

91.248

% change

вҖ“20.93%

вҖ“8.75%

100 bps fall in YTM
YTM

0.005

Price

127.794

109.730

% change

27.79%

9.73%

вҖӢ

We see that the percentage price change for the longer-maturity bond is
larger than that for the shorter-maturity bond. Also, we see that, in price terms,
the change for a YTM decrease is larger than that for a YTM increase.
Exceptions to the maturity effect exist but are rare in practice. They occur only
for low-coupon (but not zero-coupon), long-term bonds trading at a discount. The
maturity effect always holds on zero-coupon bonds, as it does for bonds priced at par
value or at a premium above par value.

Constant-Yield Price Trajectory
Bond prices change with the passage of time, even if the market discount rate remains
the same. As time passes, so as N in Equation 2 approaches zero, the bondholder
comes closer to receiving the par value at maturity, provided the issuer does not
default. The constant yield-price trajectory in Exhibit 6 illustrates price changes

143

144

Learning Module 6

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
Fixed-Income Bond Valuation: Prices and Yields

of two 10-year bonds over time: a 2% coupon bond issued at a discount and an 8%
coupon bond issued at a premium. At each time, the bond price is recalculated using
a market discount rate of 5%.

Exhibit 6: Constant-Yield Price Trajectory
Price (100 = par)
130
120
110
100
90
80
70
60
50
1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

Year
2% Coupon

8% Coupon

The 2% coupon bondвҖҷs initial price is 76.835 per 100 of par value. The price increases
each year and approaches par value as the maturity date nears. The 8% coupon bondвҖҷs
initial price is 123.165, and it decreases each year, approaching par value as the maturity date nears. Both prices are вҖңpulled to par.вҖқ Please refer to the candidate learning
ecosystem online for a spreadsheet of these calculations in the downloaded Microsoft
Excel workbook.

Convexity Effect
The percentage change in a bondвҖҷs price will also vary depending on how the yield
changes. The percentage price increase is greater, in absolute value, than the percentage
price decrease. This implies that the relationship between bond prices and yields is
not linear; instead, it is curved and вҖңconvex.вҖқ Exhibit 7 shows this general relationship
between a bondвҖҷs price and its yield-to-maturity.

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
Relationships between Bond Prices and Bond Features

Exhibit 7: Convex PriceвҖ“Yield Relationship
Yield (%)

Price

EXAMPLE 7

BRWA Bond: Convex Relationship
Despite a uniform increase and decrease in the BRWA bondвҖҷs annual yield-to-maturity, notice how the resulting changes in price are different. Please refer to the
candidate learning ecosystem online for a spreadsheet of these calculations in
the downloaded Microsoft Excel workbook.
вҖӢ

Face Value

100

Coupon payment

1.6

Number of periods

10
вҖӢ

вҖӢ

% Price
Change

YTM

Price

--

0.016

100.00

--

0.004

0.020

96.41

вҖ“3.59%

0.012

103.75

3.75%

YTM Change

вҖ“0.004
вҖӢ

A decrease in the yield-to-maturity from 160 bps to 120 bps results in a
bond price increase of 3.75%, but an increase in the YTM from 160 bps to 200
bps results in a smaller bond price decrease. Based on this, we can say that the
BRWA bond has positive convexity. Convexity will be discussed in greater detail
in a later lesson.

145

146

Learning Module 6

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
Fixed-Income Bond Valuation: Prices and Yields

KNOWLEDGE CHECK
1. Recall the Romania bond from Example 4. It pays annual coupons at
a rate of 4.625% and has a face value of 100. Its issue date is 3 April 2019 and
its maturity date is 3 April 2049. Calculate its original yield-to-maturity at
issue if its issue price is 99.488.
Solution:

The original yield-to-maturity is 4.657%. The YIELD function arguments in
Microsoft Excel or Google Sheets are as follows:
=YIELD(settlement, maturity, rate, pr, redemption,
frequency,[basis])
=YIELD(DATE(2019,4,3),DATE(2049,4,3),0.04625,99.488,100,1)
= 4.657%
2. Describe the coupon effect.
Solution:

Given two non-callable, fixed-coupon bonds that have different coupons but
are otherwise identical, for a change in yield, the lower-coupon bond will
have a greater percentage price change than the higher-coupon bond.
3. Describe the maturity effect.
Solution:

Generally, for two bonds that are identical except for their times-to-maturity, the longer-maturity bond will have a larger percentage price change than
will the shorter-maturity bond when yields change by the same amount.
4. Two non-callable, fixed-coupon bonds have the same maturity date. One
trades at a discount; the other trades at a premium. If the yield stays constant until the bonds mature and neither defaults, the two bondsвҖҷ prices will,
over time:
A. converge.
B. remain unchanged.
C. diverge.
Solution:
A is correct. The prices will converge because of the вҖңpull-to-parвҖқ effect. As
the maturity date nears, the present values of future cash flows will fall or
rise to the par value, provided that the issuer does not default.

4

MATRIX PRICING
describe matrix pricing

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.

Matrix Pricing

Matrix Pricing Process
Unlike listed equity securities, most bonds are not actively traded, so there is often
no current market price available to calculate yield-to-maturity. The same problem
occurs for bonds that are not yet issued. In these situations, it is common to estimate
price by using the prices of comparable but more frequently traded bonds. These
comparable bonds have similar times-to-maturity, coupon rates, and credit quality.
This estimation process, illustrated in Exhibit 8 and Exhibit 9, is called matrix pricing.

Exhibit 8: Matrix Pricing
Maturity of inactively
traded bond

Maturity (Years)
Yield-to-Maturity of
Inactively traded bond

Yields of actively traded
bonds for similar issuers

Sovereign вҖңon-the-runвҖқ
yield curve

2

3

5

7

10

30
Maturity Years

Exhibit 9: Determining Price of New or Illiquid Bond Using Matrix Pricing
Step 1
Step 2
Identify actively
traded,comparable
bonds based on similar
times-to-maturity,
coupon rates, and
credit quality.

Step 3
Calculate yields-tomaturity for each of the
comparable bonds, and
calculate average yield
for each maturity year.

Step 4
Linearly interpolate
calculated YTMs of the
comparable bonds to
estimate YTM closest
to the new/illiquid
bondвҖҷs maturity

Using estimated YTM,
calculate the price of
the new/illiquid bond
by discounting all
coupon and pricipal
payments.

For example, suppose that an analyst needs to value a three-year, 4% semiannual
coupon payment corporate bond, Bond X. Assume that Bond X is not actively traded
and that there are no recent transactions reported for this particular security. Exhibit
10 and Exhibit 11 shows quoted prices and yields-to-maturity for four corporate
bonds with very similar credit quality, in tabular and matrix form (by coupon rate
and time-to-maturity).

147

148

Learning Module 6

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
Fixed-Income Bond Valuation: Prices and Yields

Exhibit 10: Actively Traded Comparable Bonds
Bond

Tenor

Coupon (S/A)

Price

Yield-to-Maturity

A

2 years

3.00%

98.5

3.786%

B

2 years

5.00%

102.25

3.821%

C

5 years

2.00%

90.25

4.181%

D

5 years

4.00%

99.125

4.196%

Exhibit 11: Actively Traded Comparable Bonds Matrix
2% Coupon
Two Years

3% Coupon

4% Coupon

98.500
3.786%

Three Years

5% Coupon
102.250
3.821%

Bond X

Four Years
Five Years

90.250
4.181%

99.125
4.196%

Next, the analyst calculates the average yield for each year: 3.8035% for the two-year
bonds and 4.1885% for the five-year bonds.
0.03786 + 0.03821

______________
вҖӢ = 3.8035%вҖӢ
	вҖӢвҖҜвҖҜ
2
0.04181 + 0.04196

______________
вҖӢ = 4.1855%вҖӢ
	вҖӢвҖҜвҖҜ
2

The estimated three-year yield for bonds of similar credit quality can be obtained with
linear interpolation. The interpolated yield is 3.932%.
	вҖӢ0.038035 + (
вҖӢ_
вҖӢ5 вҲ’ 2 вҖӢ)вҖӢГ— вҖӢ(0.041885 вҲ’ 0.038035)вҖӢ = 0.03932.вҖӢ
3вҲ’2

Using 3.9318% as the estimated three-year annual yield, the three-year, 4% semiannual
coupon payment corporate bond has an estimated price of 100.191 per 100 of par value.
2
2
2
2
2
_
вҖӢ+ _
вҖӢ
вҖӢ+ _
вҖӢ
вҖӢ+ _
вҖӢ
вҖӢ+ _
вҖӢ
вҖӢ+
вҖӢ(
вҖӢ 1.019659)вҖӢ1вҖӢ вҖӢ(1.019659)вҖӢ2вҖӢ вҖӢ(1.019659)вҖӢ3вҖӢ вҖӢ(1.019659)вҖӢ4вҖӢ вҖӢ(1.019659)вҖӢ5вҖӢ
вҖҜвҖҜвҖҜвҖҜвҖҜвҖҜ
	вҖӢ
вҖӢвҖӢ
102
_
вҖӢ(
вҖӢ = 100.191.
вҖӢ 1.019659)вҖӢ6вҖӢ

Calculation of yield-to-maturity can also be done with the Excel or Google Sheets
YIELD function:
=YIELD(DATE(2025,10,1),DATE(2028,10,1),0.04,100.191,100,2,1)

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.

Matrix Pricing

Matrix pricing also is used in underwriting new bonds to get an estimate of the
required yield spread over the benchmark rate, or the difference in yield-to-maturity
between the bond and that of a government benchmark bond with the same or a
similar time-to-maturity.
Suppose that a corporation is about to issue a five-year bond. The corporate issuer
currently has a four-year, 3% annual coupon payment debt liability. The price of that
bond is 102.400 per 100 of par value. This is the full price, which is the same as the
flat price because the accrued interest is zero. This implies that the coupon payment
has just been made and there are four full years to maturity. The four-year rate of
return required by investors for this bond is 2.36%:
3
вҖӢ1 + r вҖӢ вҖӢ

3
вҖӢ1 + r вҖӢ вҖӢ

3
вҖӢ1 + r вҖӢ вҖӢ

103
вҖӢ1 + r вҖӢ вҖӢ

	вҖӢ102.400 = _
вҖӢ(
вҖӢ+ _
вҖӢ(
вҖӢ+ _
вҖӢ(
вҖӢ+ _
вҖӢ(
вҖӢ; r = 0.0236.вҖӢ
)1
)2
)3
)4
This can also be calculated using the YIELD function in Microsoft Excel or Google
Sheets:
=YIELD(DATE(2025,10,1),DATE(2029,10,1),0.03,102.401,100,2,1)
Suppose that there are no four-year government bonds to calculate the required
yield spread on this security. However, there are three-year and five-year government
bonds that have yields-to-maturity of 0.75% and 1.45%, respectively. The average of
the two yields-to-maturity is 1.10%, which is the estimated yield for the four-year
government bond. Therefore, the estimated required yield spread is 126 bps over the
implied benchmark rate (0.0236 вҖ“ 0.0110 = 0.0126).
The issuer now has an estimate of the four-year yield spread: 126 bps. This spread
is a reference point for estimating the five-year spread for the newly issued bond.
QUESTION SET
1. True or false: Bond price quotes on such platforms as Bloomberg
often represent the price at which the most recent trade for that bond was
made.
A. True
B. False
Solution:
False. Most bonds are infrequently traded, so price quotes on such platforms
as Bloomberg are often estimated using matrix pricing methods.
2. An analyst is estimating a price for an illiquid four-year, 4.5% annual coupon payment corporate bond. The analyst identifies two corporate bonds
that have similar credit quality: One is a three-year, 5.50% annual coupon
payment bond priced at 107.500 per 100 of par value, and the other is a fiveyear, 4.50% annual coupon payment bond priced at 104.750 per 100 of par
value. Using matrix pricing, the estimated price of the illiquid bond per 100
of par value is closest to:
A. 103.895.
B. 104.991.
C. 106.125.
Solution:
B is correct. The first step is to determine the yields-to-maturity on the
observed bonds. The required yield on the three-year, 5.50% bond priced at
107.500 is 2.856%:

149

150

Learning Module 6

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
Fixed-Income Bond Valuation: Prices and Yields

5.50
вҖӢ1 + r вҖӢ вҖӢ

5.50
вҖӢ1 + r вҖӢ вҖӢ

105.50
вҖӢ1 + r вҖӢ вҖӢ

	вҖӢ107.500 = _
вҖӢ(
вҖӢ+ _
вҖӢ(
вҖӢ+ _
вҖӢ(
вҖӢ; r = 0.02856.вҖӢ
)1
)2
)3
The required yield on the five-year, 4.50% bond priced at 104.750 is 3.449%:
4.50
вҖӢ1 + r вҖӢ вҖӢ

4.50
вҖӢ1 + r вҖӢ вҖӢ

4.50
вҖӢ1 + r вҖӢ вҖӢ

4.50
вҖӢ1 + r вҖӢ вҖӢ

104.50
вҖӢ1 + r вҖӢ вҖӢ

вҖӢ+ _
вҖӢ(
вҖӢ+ _
вҖӢ(
вҖӢ+ _
вҖӢ(
вҖӢ+ _
вҖӢ(
вҖӢ; r = 0.03449.вҖӢ
	вҖӢ104.750 = вҖӢ_
)5
(
)1
)2
)3
)4
The estimated yield for a four-year bond having the same credit quality is
the average of two required yields:
0.02856 + 0.03449

______________
вҖӢ = 0.031525.вҖӢ
	вҖӢвҖҜвҖҜ
2

Given an estimated yield-to-maturity of 3.153%, the estimated price of the
illiquid four-year, 4.50% annual coupon payment corporate bond is 104.991
per 100 of par value:
4.50
вҖӢ 1.031525 вҖӢ вҖӢ

4.50
вҖӢ 1.031525 вҖӢ вҖӢ

4.50
вҖӢ 1.031525 вҖӢ вҖӢ

104.50
вҖӢ 1.031525 вҖӢ вҖӢ

	вҖӢ_
вҖӢ+ _
вҖӢ(
вҖӢ+ _
вҖӢ(
вҖӢ+ _
вҖӢ(
вҖӢ = 104.991.вҖӢ
(
)1
)2
)3
)4

3. An analyst uses the matrix pricing approach to determine the price of an
illiquid bond. Identify three bond features that could be used to compare
frequently traded bonds with the illiquid one.
Solution:

Matrix pricing involves determining the price of a new or illiquid bond by
comparing it to frequently traded bonds with similar
1. maturity,
2. coupon rates, and
3. credit quality.

Practice Problems

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.

PRACTICE PROBLEMS
1. A non-callable, fixed-coupon bond has a price of 106.0625 and a YTM of 2.8%. If
the YTM were to increase instantaneously by 80 bps, the price of the bond would
decrease by 11%. If the YTM were to decrease instantaneously by 80 bps, the
price of the bond would increase by:
A. less than 11%.
B. exactly 11%.
C. more than 11%.
2. Exceptions to the maturity effect exist for bonds that have:
A. long maturities, make small coupon payments, and trade at a discount.
B. short maturities, have high coupon rates, and trade at a discount.
C. long maturities, have high coupon rates, and trade at a premium.
3. With a constant market discount rate, as a non-callable, fixed-coupon bond
approaches maturity:
A. the priceвҖ“yield relationship will become more convex.
B. a low-coupon bond trading at a discount will increase in price.
C. a high-coupon bond trading at a premium will increase in price.
4. A fixed-income analyst is pricing a bond using the following equation.
3
вҖӢ(1 + 0.0275)вҖӢ вҖӢ

3
вҖӢ(1 + 0.0275)вҖӢ вҖӢ

103
вҖӢ(1 + 0.0275)вҖӢ вҖӢ

_
___________
	вҖӢPV = _
вҖӢ
1 вҖӢ+ вҖӢ
2 вҖӢ+ .... + вҖӢвҖҜвҖҜ
40 вҖӢ

The bondвҖҷs price, relative to par, is most likely:
A. greater than 100.
B. exactly 100.
C. less than 100.
5. A four-year, 2.0% semiannual coupon bond that pays coupons semiannually is
trading at a price of 102.581. The bondвҖҷs annualized yield-to-maturity is closest to:
A. 0.67%.
B. 1.34%.
C. 2.22%.
6. A bond is traded in between its coupon payment dates. Which of the following is
true?
A. The buyer must pay the full price plus the accrued interest.
B. The bondвҖҷs quoted price is greater than its flat price.
C. Accrued interest is not included in the flat price.

151

152

Learning Module 6

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
Fixed-Income Bond Valuation: Prices and Yields

7. An analyst is analyzing a bond that will soon be issued by XYZ Company. The
new bond will have five years to maturity and a 2.25% coupon, paid semiannually.
XYZ has never issued bonds before, so the analyst will use matrix pricing. The
analyst has identified four similar bonds with the following characteristics.
Bond

Maturity

Coupon (S/A)

YTM

A

4 Years

2.250%

1.6995%

B

4 Years

1.750%

1.5438%

C

7 Years

2.250%

2.2671%

D

7 Years

1.500%

1.9576%

Using the information provided, create a pricing matrix for the analyst to estimate the price of the XYZ five-year bond by filling in the matrix below with
Bonds A, B, C, and D:
Coupon Rate
1.50%
4 Years
5 Years
6 Years
7 Years

1.75%

2.25%

2.25%

Solutions

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.

SOLUTIONS
1. C is correct. The absolute amount of the price increase would be more than the
absolute amount of the price decrease for the same absolute change in YTM
because of the convex relationship between bond price and yield.
A is incorrect because of the positive convex relationship between bond price
and yield. For a given level of yield change, the price rise for that given amount
of yield decrease will be larger than the price decline for that amount of yield
increase.
B is incorrect because the relationship between bond price and yield is not linear.
2. A is correct. Exceptions to the maturity effect are rare and occur only for
low-coupon (but not zero-coupon) long-term bonds trading at a discount.
B is incorrect because the maturity effect holds for bonds that have short maturities and high coupons.
C is incorrect because the maturity effect always holds on bonds priced at a premium above par value.
3. B is correct. Any bond trading at a discount will increase in price because of the
pull-to-par effect.
A is incorrect because the priceвҖ“yield relationship generally becomes less convex
as a bond approaches maturity.
C is incorrect because a high-coupon bond trading at a premium will decrease in
price as it approaches maturity.
4. A is correct. The bondвҖҷs periodic coupon rate exceeds the periodic market discount rate, or its coupon rate is вҖңexcessiveвҖқ relative to the market. Therefore, the
bond will trade at a premium to par.
B is incorrect. For the bond to trade at par, the coupon rate and market discount
rate (yield-to-maturity) must be equal.
C is incorrect. For the bond to trade at a discount, the yield-to-maturity would
have to be higher than the coupon rate.
5. B is correct. Two approaches to calculating the yield-to-maturity are calculating
an IRR or using the YIELD function in Microsoft Excel or Google Sheets. The
periodic IRR is annualized by multiplying by two.
Period

Cash Flow

YIELD Function

0

вҖ“102.581

Settlement date

1/1/2000

1

1

Maturity date

1/1/2004

2

1

Coupon

0.02

3

1

Price

102.581

4

1

Redemption

100

5

1

Coupon frequency

2

6

1

Yield

7

1

8

101

Periodic IRR

Annualized IRR

1.34%

0.67%
1.34%

A is incorrect because 0.67% is the periodic, not annualized, yield-to-maturity.

153

154

Learning Module 6

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
Fixed-Income Bond Valuation: Prices and Yields

C is incorrect. Note that this choice can be eliminated because the bond is trading at a premium; thus its yield-to-maturity is lower than its coupon rate of 2.0%.
Please refer to the candidate learning ecosystem online for a spreadsheet of these
calculations in the downloaded Microsoft Excel workbook.
6. C is correct. The flat price, quoted by bond dealers, is the full price less accrued
interest. Accrued interest is not included in the flat price.
A is incorrect. The buyer must pay the full price, which already includes accrued
interest.
B is incorrect. The flat price is the quoted price.
7. To price the new XYZ bond, the analyst should group yields for comparable
bonds in a matrix with maturities and coupon rates.
Coupon Rate
1.50%
4 Years

1.75%

2.25%

B

A

5 Years
6 Years
7 Years

D

2.25%

C

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.

LEARNING MODULE

7

Yield and Yield Spread Measures
for Fixed-Rate Bonds
LEARNING OUTCOMES
Mastery

The candidate should be able to:
calculate annual yield on a bond for varying compounding periods in
a year
compare, calculate, and interpret yield and yield spread measures for
fixed-rate bonds

INTRODUCTION
Earlier lessons demonstrated the relationship between bond prices and yields-to-maturity
(YTMs), as well as other features, such as coupon rate and time-to-maturity. Two
important considerations for interpreting and determining yields-to-maturity and
other yield measures are the assumed frequency of compounding interest and the
presence of embedded options that could affect cash flow amounts or timing. This
module explores these considerations and extends the analysis of yields by introducing
spread measures, which compare yields to benchmark rates to ascertain how much
an investor would be compensated for taking certain risks.
Most of the examples and exhibits used throughout the reading can be downloaded
as a Microsoft Excel workbook. Each worksheet in the workbook is labeled with the
corresponding example or exhibit number in the text.
LEARNING MODULE OVERVIEW
в– 

Yields-to-maturity allow analysts to use a single measure to
compare bonds with varying maturities and coupons. An
important factor in yield determination and interpretation is the frequency of compounding, known as periodicity.

в– 

All else equal, more frequent compounding results in greater future
values or returns. Therefore, compounding more frequently at a lower
rate can be equivalent to compounding less frequently at a higher rate;
the more frequent compounding makes up for the lower rate.

1

156

Learning Module 7

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
Yield and Yield Spread Measures for Fixed-Rate Bonds

в– 

Prices and yields of bonds with embedded options require adjustments
to reflect the value of the option. The option-adjusted yield spread and
yield-to-worst are measures that reflect option values.

в– 

Yield measures for a bond, as well as changes in them, can be decomposed into a benchmark rate and a spread over the benchmark rate.
Benchmark rates reflect macroeconomic, вҖңtop-downвҖқ conditions that
affect all bonds in a market, while spreads capture issuer-specific,
вҖңbottom-upвҖқ factors, such as credit risk, liquidity, and taxation.

в– 

Similar to how a yield curve graphically depicts the relationship
between yields-to-maturity and times-to-maturity for securities with
the same risk profile, benchmark rates and spreads can be graphed by
time-to-maturity as well, to show the term structure of credit spreads.

LEARNING MODULE SELF-ASSESSMENT
These initial questions are intended to help you gauge your current level
of understanding of the learning module.
1. Complete the sentences by filling in the blanks using the following words:
annualized
compounded
standardized
Both capital market securitiesвҖҷ yields and money market rates with maturity
dates shorter than one year are _________________. However, money market rates are not ________________.
Solution:

Both capital market securitiesвҖҷ yields and money market rates with maturity
dates shorter than one year are annualized. However, money market rates
are not compounded.
2. A three-year sovereign non-callable bond is priced at 106.24 per 100. The
bond pays a 2% semiannual coupon. The annual yield-to-maturity for the
bond is closest to:
A. 0.077%.
B. 0.039%.
C. 1.883%.
Solution:
A is correct. Given that the bond pays coupons semiannually, the semiannual yield-to-maturity is calculated by solving for r in the following equation.
Additionally, the IRR or YIELD functions in Microsoft Excel and Google
Sheets can be used.

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.

Introduction

101

106.24 = _
вҖӢ 1 1 вҖӢ+ _
вҖӢ 1 вҖӢ+ _
вҖӢ 1 вҖӢ+ _
вҖӢ 1 вҖӢ+ _
вҖӢ 1 вҖӢ+ _
вҖӢ
вҖӢ.
вҖӢ(1 + r)вҖӢ вҖӢ вҖӢ(1 + r)вҖӢ2вҖӢ вҖӢ(1 + r)вҖӢ3вҖӢ вҖӢ(1 + r)вҖӢ4вҖӢ вҖӢ(1 + r)вҖӢ5вҖӢ вҖӢ(1 + r)вҖӢ6вҖӢ вҖӢ
вҖҜвҖҜвҖҜвҖҜвҖҜвҖҜ
	вҖӢ
r = вҲ’ 0.00038596.
Given that the yield is expressed in semiannual terms, it needs to be annualized by multiplying by 2, which results in вҖ“0.000772, or вҖ“0.077%.
B is incorrect because it is the semiannual, not annual, yield.
C is incorrect because 1.883% is the bondвҖҷs current yield, not
yield-to-maturity.
3. A fixed-income analyst obtains the following data for three corporate bonds
with the same maturity dates. The relevant government bond benchmark
rate, calculated on a semiannual bond equivalent basis, is 1.10%. Calculate
the G-spread for each bond.
вҖӢ

Bond A

Bond B

Bond C

Yield-to-maturity

1.271%

1.213%

1.178%

Coupon frequency and
assumed periodicity

Annual

Semiannual

Quarterly

вҖӢ

Solution:
The G-spread for Bond B is (0.01271 вҖ“ 0.011) = 173 bps.
Before computing the G-spreads for Bonds A and C, the yields-to-maturity
must first be converted to a periodicity of two. The semiannual equivalent
yield for Bond A is 1.267%:
m

n

вҖӢ m вҖӢ)вҖӢ вҖӢ = вҖӢ(1 + _
вҖӢ n вҖӢ)вҖӢ вҖӢ.
вҖӢ(1 + _
AP вҖӢRm
вҖӢвҖӢ

AP вҖӢRnвҖӢ вҖӢ

AP вҖӢRвҖӢ вҖӢ 2вҖӢвҖӢ
вҖҜвҖҜвҖҜ
вҖҜвҖҜвҖҜ
	вҖӢ
0.01271 1
вҖӢ(1 + _
вҖӢ 1 вҖӢ)вҖӢ вҖӢ = вҖӢ(1 + _
вҖӢ 2 2 вҖӢ)вҖӢ вҖӢ.
AP вҖӢRвҖӢ2вҖӢ = 0.01267 = 1.267 % .

Thus, its G-spread is (0.01267 вҖ“ 0.011) = 167 bps.
The semiannual equivalent yield for Bond C is 1.1797%:
m

n

вҖӢ m вҖӢ)вҖӢ вҖӢ = вҖӢ(1 + _
вҖӢ n вҖӢ)вҖӢ вҖӢ.
вҖӢ(1 + _
AP вҖӢRвҖӢmвҖӢ

AP вҖӢRвҖӢnвҖӢ

4
AP вҖӢRвҖӢ вҖӢ 2 вҖӢвҖӢ
вҖҜвҖҜвҖҜ
вҖҜвҖҜвҖҜ
	вҖӢ
0.01178
вҖӢ(1 + _
вҖӢ 4 )
вҖӢ вҖӢвҖӢ= (
вҖӢ 1+_
вҖӢ 2 2 вҖӢ)вҖӢ вҖӢ.
AP вҖӢR2вҖӢ вҖӢ = 0.011797 = 1.1797 % .

Thus, its G-spread is (0.011797 вҖ“ 0.011) = 8 bps.
4. If a bond has an embedded call option and the value of the call option is
positive, the option-adjusted price, compared to the flat price of the bond, is
most likely:
A. lower.
B. the same.
C. higher.
Solution:
A is correct. The value of the call option is the price of the option-free bond
minus the price of the callable bond. If the value of the call option is posi-

157

158

Learning Module 7

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
Yield and Yield Spread Measures for Fixed-Rate Bonds

tive, then the option-adjusted price is lower compared to the flat price of the
bond.
B is incorrect because if the value of the call option is positive, the option-adjusted price compared to the flat price of the bond is lower, not the
same.
C is incorrect because if the value of the call option is positive, the option-adjusted price compared to the flat price of the bond is lower, not
higher.

2

PERIODICITY AND ANNUALIZED YIELDS
calculate annual yield on a bond for varying compounding periods in
a year
Investors analyzing bonds with various cash flow and maturity profiles seek a standardized yield measure to compare across different choices. Yield measures are usually annualized in order to allow a direct comparison. For capital market securities
maturing in more than one year, investors want an annualized and compounded
yield-to-maturity. Conventions for instruments maturing in one year or less will be
covered in a later lesson.
An annualized and compounded yield on a fixed-rate bond depends on the assumed
number of interest periods in the year, which is called the periodicity of the annual
rate. The periodicity typically matches the frequency of coupon payments. For example, the fixed-coupon five-year bond issued by Bright Wheels Automotive (BRWA)
from earlier lessons pays semiannual coupons with a stated annual yield-to-maturity
of 3.2% for a periodicity of 2вҖ”the rate per semiannual period (1.6%) times 2. A bond
that pays quarterly coupons has a stated annual yield for a periodicity of 4вҖ”the rate
per quarter times 4.
Exhibit 1 shows how a 5% stated annual yield-to-maturity generates different
amounts in one year with annual, semiannual, quarterly, monthly compounding based
on a fixed-rate par bond priced at 100.

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
Periodicity and Annualized Yields

Exhibit 1: Effective Annual Rate for Different Compounding Periods
Time
t=0

t=1

Periodicity
(Rate per Period)

Bond interest at year end
(Price = 100)

Annual
(5.00%)

5.00

Semi-annual
(2.50%)

5.0625

Quarterly
(1.25%)

5.0945

Monthly
(0.4167%)

5.1162

The bond interest amounts on the right-hand side of Exhibit 1 expressed as percentages
are known as effective annual rates. An effective annual rate has a periodicity of 1
because there is just one compounding period in the year. For example, for a quarterly
coupon bond that pays 1.25% per period, or an annual coupon rate of (1.25% Г— 4)
= 5%, each coupon received is assumed to be reinvested at the periodic rateвҖ”here,
1.25%вҖ”for the remainder of the year. We can solve for the future value of these cash
flows using the Excel or Google Sheets FV function:
=FV(rate, nper, pmt, [pv], [type]),
where
rate is the periodic reinvestment rate
nper is the number of periods in a year
pmt is the rate per period
[pv] is the present value
[type] indicates when payments occur, with 0 designating payment at the end
of each period
For the quarterly coupon bond:
=FV(0.0125,4,1.25,0,0) = 5.0945.
Therefore, assuming each coupon is reinvested at 1.25% through the end of the
year, a quarterly coupon bond with an annual stated rate of 5% generates the same
interest as an annual coupon bond with a stated rate of 5.0945%. The Excel or Google
Sheets EFFECT function may also be used to calculate the effective annual rate for a
given number of compounding periods per year.
The most common periodicity in the United States, the United Kingdom, and several other fixed-income markets is 2 because most bonds in these jurisdictions make
semiannual coupon payments. An annual rate having a periodicity of two is known as
a semiannual bond basis yield, or semiannual bond equivalent yield. Therefore, a
semiannual bond basis yield is the yield per semiannual period times 2. It is important
to remember that вҖңsemiannual bond basis yieldвҖқ and вҖңyield per semiannual periodвҖқ
have different meanings. For example, if a bond yield is 2% per semiannual period,
its annual yield is 4% when stated on a semiannual bond basis.

159

160

Learning Module 7

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
Yield and Yield Spread Measures for Fixed-Rate Bonds

EXAMPLE 1

Periodicity of Zero-Coupon Bonds
The periodicity of the annual market discount rate for a zero-coupon bond is
arbitrary because there are no coupon payments. Consider a five-year, zero-coupon bond priced at 80 per 100 of par value. Assuming annual compounding, or
a periodicity of one, the yield-to-maturity is 4.564%.
100
вҖӢ1 + r вҖӢ вҖӢ

	вҖӢ80 = _
вҖӢ(
вҖӢ; r = 0.045640;4.564%вҖӢ
)5
Assuming quarterly compounding, or a periodicity of four, the annual yield-to-maturity for this same five-year, zero-coupon bond is 4.488%.
100
вҖӢ1 + r вҖӢ вҖӢ

	вҖӢ80 = _
вҖӢ(
вҖӢ; r = 0.011220; Г— 4 = 0.044880.вҖӢ
) 20
As shown in Exhibit 2, 2.2565% compounded 2 times a year, 1.1220% compounded 4 times a year, and 0.3726% compounded 12 times a year are all equivalent to an effective annual rate of 4.564%.
вҖӢ

Exhibit 2: Periodicity of Annual Discount Rate for Zero-Coupon Bond
вҖӢ

вҖӢ

Column 3:

Column 5:

Column 1

Column 2

(Col. 2 Г— 5)

Column 4

(Col. 2 Г— Col. 4)

Column 6:
(1+Col. 4)^(Col. 2)

Periodicity

Number of
Periods/ Year

Number of
Compounding
Periods

Periodic
Yield-toMaturity (%)

Annual Yield- to-Maturity (%)

Periodic YTM
Compounded at
Periods/ Year (%)

Annual

1

5

0.045640

0.045640

0.045640

Semi-annual

2

10

0.022565

0.045130

0.045640

Quarterly

4

20

0.011220

0.044879

0.045640

Monthly

12

60

0.003726

0.044712

0.045640
вҖӢ

The compounded total return is the same for each expression for the annual
rate. They differ in terms of the number of compounding periods per yearвҖ”that
is, in terms of the periodicity of the annual rate. For a given pair of cash flows,
the stated annual rate and the periodicity are inversely related.
An important tool in fixed-income analysis is the conversion of an annualized
yield using one periodicity to another periodicity. These are called periodicity, or
compounding, conversions. Equation 1 shows a general formula to convert an annual
percentage rate (APR) for m periods per year, denoted APRm, to an annual percentage
rate for n periods per year, APRn:
m

n

вҖӢ m вҖӢ)вҖӢ вҖӢ = вҖӢ(1 + _
вҖӢ n вҖӢ)вҖӢ вҖӢ.вҖӢ	
	вҖӢ(1 + _
AP вҖӢRвҖӢmвҖӢ

AP вҖӢRвҖӢnвҖӢ

(1)

For example, suppose that a three-year, 5% semiannual coupon payment corporate
bond is priced at 104 per 100 of par value. Its yield-to-maturity is 3.582%, quoted on
a semiannual bond basis for a periodicity of 2: 0.01791 Г— 2 = 0.03582.
2.5
вҖӢ1 + r вҖӢ вҖӢ

2.5
вҖӢ1 + r вҖӢ вҖӢ

2.5
вҖӢ1 + r вҖӢ вҖӢ

2.5
вҖӢ1 + r вҖӢ вҖӢ

2.5
вҖӢ1 + r вҖӢ вҖӢ

102.5
вҖӢ1 + r вҖӢ вҖӢ

вҖӢ+ _
вҖӢ(
вҖӢ+ _
вҖӢ(
вҖӢ+ _
вҖӢ(
вҖӢ+ _
вҖӢ(
вҖӢ+ _
вҖӢ(
вҖӢ; r = 0.01791.вҖӢ
	вҖӢ104 = вҖӢ_
)5
(
)1
)2
)3
)4
)6
To compare this bond with others, an analyst converts this annualized yield-to-maturity
to quarterly and monthly compounding. Doing so entails using Equation 1 to convert
from a periodicity of m = 2 to periodicities of n = 4 and n = 12.

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
Periodicity and Annualized Yields

AP вҖӢRвҖӢ вҖӢ 4

	вҖӢ(1 + _
вҖӢ 2 вҖӢ)вҖӢ вҖӢ = (
вҖӢ 1+_
вҖӢ 4 4 вҖӢ)вҖӢ вҖӢ; AP вҖӢR4вҖӢ вҖӢ = 0.03566.вҖӢ
0.03582 2

AP вҖӢRвҖӢ вҖӢ 12

вҖӢ 2 вҖӢ)вҖӢ вҖӢ = вҖӢ(1 + _
вҖӢ 12 12 вҖӢ)вҖӢ вҖӢ; AP вҖӢRвҖӢ12вҖӢ = 0.03556.вҖӢ
	вҖӢ(1 + _
0.03582 2

An annual yield-to-maturity of 3.582% for semiannual compounding provides the
same rate of return as annual yields of 3.566% and 3.556% for quarterly and monthly
compounding, respectively. A general rule for periodicity conversions is compounding
more frequently at a lower annual rate corresponds to compounding less frequently at a
higher annual rate. This rule can be used to check periodicity conversion calculations.
EXAMPLE 2

Comparing Strip Bonds to Coupon Bonds
Financial intermediaries can own coupon bonds and then issue individual
zero-coupon bonds composed of coupon or principal payments from the coupon bonds. These zero-coupon bonds are known as strip bonds. Strip bonds are
attractive to investors seeking to match known cash flows on a specific future date.
A 20-year government of Canada strip (zero-coupon) bond is priced at
69.4300 per 100. An analyst wants to compare the yield of the strip bond with
that of a newly issued 20-year coupon bond. Both the strip bond and the coupon
bond are non-callable. The 20-year coupon bond pays semiannual coupons of
2%, and its current price is 101.99 per 100, which corresponds to a semiannual
bond equivalent yield of 1.880%.
The analyst will compute a semiannual bond equivalent yield for the strip
bond and compare it to the semiannual bond equivalent yield of 1.880% of the
20-year coupon bond.
There are two approaches. The first involves calculating a yield-to-maturity assuming annual compounding for the strip bond and converting it to
a semiannual equivalent bond yield. The second approach involves directly
computing a semiannual yield-to-maturity for the strip bond and annualizing
it by multiplying it by 2.

Approach 1
The 20-year strip bond does not pay any coupons, so as the first step, we assume
annual compounding (periodicity of 1) to calculate an effective annual rate based
on the current price and remaining years to maturity.
100
вҖӢ(1 + r)вҖӢ вҖӢ

	вҖӢ69.43 = _
вҖӢ
20 вҖӢ; r = 0.01840997 = 1.841 % .вҖӢ
The next step is to convert the effective annual rate to semiannual bond equivalent yield. This is done by using Equation 1 to convert from a periodicity of 1
to a periodicity of 2.
m

n

вҖӢ(1 + _
вҖӢ m вҖӢ)вҖӢ вҖӢ = вҖӢ(1 + _
вҖӢ n вҖӢ)вҖӢ вҖӢ.
AP вҖӢRm
вҖӢвҖӢ

AP вҖӢRnвҖӢ вҖӢ

AP вҖӢRвҖӢ вҖӢ 2вҖӢвҖӢ вҖӢ
вҖҜвҖҜвҖҜ
вҖҜвҖҜвҖҜ
	вҖӢ
0.01841 1
вҖӢ(1 + _
вҖӢ 1 вҖӢ)вҖӢ вҖӢ = вҖӢ(1 + _
вҖӢ 2 2 вҖӢ)вҖӢ вҖӢ.
AP вҖӢRвҖӢ2вҖӢ = 0.01832604 = 1.833 % .

161

162

Learning Module 7

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
Yield and Yield Spread Measures for Fixed-Rate Bonds

Approach 2
Alternatively, we can assume that compounding happens semiannually (periodicity of two) and the effective rate calculated would be semiannual.
100
вҖӢ(1 + r)вҖӢ вҖӢ

	вҖӢ69.43 = _
вҖӢ
40 вҖӢ; r = 0.009163 = 0.916 % .вҖӢ
To annualize this, we multiply it by 2 and obtain the same result as the first
approach: 1.833%.
EXAMPLE 3

Periodicity Conversion with Negative Yields
Assume the German government issues a five-year zero-coupon bond at a price
of 103.72. Calculate the effective annual rate of the bond at issuance assuming
annual, semiannual, and monthly compounding.

Solution:
First, we can calculate the German bondвҖҷs yield-to-maturity as an effective annual
rate assuming the periodicity of 1.
100
вҖӢ(1 + r)вҖӢ вҖӢ

	вҖӢ103.72 = _
вҖӢ
5 вҖӢ; r = вҲ’ 0.00727834 = вҲ’ 0.7278 % .вҖӢ
Converting that yield to semiannual and monthly compounding requires using
Equation 1 to convert to from a periodicity of 1 to periodicities of 2 and 12,
respectively.
Conversion of an annual yield (m = 1) to semiannual (n = 2):
m

n

вҖӢ m вҖӢ)вҖӢ вҖӢ = вҖӢ(1 + _
вҖӢ n вҖӢ)вҖӢ вҖӢ.
вҖӢ(1 + _
AP вҖӢRвҖӢmвҖӢ

AP вҖӢRвҖӢnвҖӢ

1
AP вҖӢRвҖӢ вҖӢвҖӢ 2 вҖӢвҖӢ
вҖҜвҖҜвҖҜ
вҖҜвҖҜвҖҜ
	вҖӢ
вҲ’ 0.007278
вҖӢ(1 + _
вҖӢ 1
вҖӢ вҖӢвҖӢ= (
вҖӢ 1+_
вҖӢ 2 2 вҖӢ)вҖӢ вҖӢ.
)
AP вҖӢR2вҖӢ вҖӢ = вҲ’ 0.007291 = вҲ’ 0.7291 % .

Conversion of an annual yield (m = 1) to monthly (n = 12):
m

n

вҖӢ m вҖӢ)вҖӢ вҖӢ = вҖӢ(1 + _
вҖӢ n вҖӢ)вҖӢ вҖӢ.
вҖӢ(1 + _
AP вҖӢRm
вҖӢвҖӢ

AP вҖӢRnвҖӢ вҖӢ

1
AP вҖӢRвҖӢ вҖӢвҖӢ 12 вҖӢ
вҖҜвҖҜвҖҜвҖҜ
вҖҜвҖҜвҖҜ
	вҖӢ
вҲ’ 0.007278
вҖӢ(1 + _
вҖӢ 1
вҖӢ)вҖӢ вҖӢ = вҖӢ(1 + _
вҖӢ 12 12 вҖӢ)вҖӢ вҖӢ.
AP вҖӢRвҖӢ2вҖӢ = вҲ’ 0.007303 = вҲ’ 0.7303 % .

Note: Quantities in the calculation are not rounded, though they are shown
with three decimal places for presentation purposes. Solutions are rounded to
three decimal places.
QUESTION SET
1. A bond has a yield-to-maturity of вҖ“0.50% using annual compounding. If the yield is converted to monthly compounding, it will most likely be:
A. greater than вҖ“0.50%.
B. equal to вҖ“0.50%.

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
Other Yield Measures, Conventions, and Accounting for Embedded Options

163

C. less than вҖ“0.50%.
Solution:
C is correct. A general rule for periodicity conversions is compounding
more frequently within the year corresponds to a lower (or more negative)
yield-to-maturity.
2. Convert a yield of 1.736% compounded monthly to an effective annual rate.
Solution:

The effective annual rate assumes only one compounding period in a year
(periodicity of 1). Converting from monthly to annual compounding requires converting from a periodicity of 12 to 1:
m

n

вҖӢ m вҖӢ)вҖӢ вҖӢ = вҖӢ(1 + _
вҖӢ n вҖӢ)вҖӢ вҖӢ.
вҖӢ(1 + _
AP вҖӢRm
вҖӢвҖӢ

AP вҖӢRnвҖӢ вҖӢ

AP вҖӢRвҖӢ вҖӢ 1вҖӢ вҖӢ
вҖҜвҖҜвҖҜ
вҖҜвҖҜвҖҜ
	вҖӢ
0.01736 12
вҖӢ(1 + _
вҖӢ 12 вҖӢ)вҖӢ вҖӢ = вҖӢ(1 + _
вҖӢ 1 1 вҖӢ)вҖӢ вҖӢ.
AP вҖӢR1вҖӢ вҖӢ = 0.0175 = 1.75 % .

3. When calculating yield-to-maturity for a strip (zero-coupon) bond, the periodicity must be 1.
Justify your answer.
A. True
B. False
Solution
False. The periodicity of the annual market discount rate for a zero-coupon
bond is arbitrary because there are no coupon payments. For example, a
yield calculated using quarterly periodicity (4) can simply be converted to a
yield with annual periodicity (1).

3

OTHER YIELD MEASURES, CONVENTIONS, AND
ACCOUNTING FOR EMBEDDED OPTIONS
compare, calculate, and interpret yield and yield spread measures for
fixed-rate bonds

Other Yield Measures and Conventions
The current yield, a simple measure equal to a bondвҖҷs annual coupon divided by the
flat price, was introduced in an earlier lesson. For example, if the BRWA 3.2% semiannual fixed-coupon five-year bond introduced earlier were trading at a price of 98.7
per $100 in face value at time t, its current yield would be
CYt = Annual coupont/Bond pricet
= 3.2%/0.987 = 3.242%.

(2)

164

Learning Module 7

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
Yield and Yield Spread Measures for Fixed-Rate Bonds

The current yield is a crude measure of return because it focuses solely on interest
income, ignoring the frequency of coupon payments, interest on interest (time value
of money), and accrued interest. In addition to collecting and reinvesting coupon payments, the investor has a gain if the bond is purchased at a discount and is redeemed
at par value. The investor has a loss if the bond is purchased at a premium and is
redeemed at par value.
In practice, the actual timing of cash flows is important for quoting and calculating
bond yields-to-maturity. Consider from earlier the 30-year 4.625% annual coupon
Romania eurobond maturing on 3 April 2049. Suppose that for settlement on 3 April
2026, the bond is priced at 97.3684 per 100 of par value to yield 4.75% quoted on an
annual, actual/actual basis. Its coupon payment is scheduled for 3 April of each year.
The yield calculation implicitly assumes that the payments are made on those exact
dates. This calculation ignores the fact that several of those dates are not business days.
For example, both 3 April 2027 and 3 April 2032 are Saturdays, so investors will receive
coupon payments on the following Mondays, 5 April 2027 and 2032, respectively.
Yield measures that assume payments are made on scheduled dates and that do not
account for weekends and holidays are quoted on what is called street convention.
This assumption simplifies bond price and yield calculations and commonly is used
in practice. A true yield that uses the actual payment dates (e.g., 5 April 2027 and
2032 in the Romania bond example), accounting for weekends and holidays, can also
be computed. The true yield is never higher than the street convention yield because
weekends and holidays delay the time to payment. The difference is typically small,
no more than a basis point or two. Therefore, the true yield is not commonly used
in practice.
Recall that corporate bond yields typically use the 30/360 day count convention.
Sometimes, these yields are restated using an actual/actual day count, known as a
government equivalent yield. The government equivalent yield on a corporate bond
can be used to obtain the spread (difference) over a government bond yield.
EXAMPLE 4

Government Equivalent Yield for BRWA Five-Year Bond
In an earlier example, BRWA issued a 3.2% semiannual fixed-coupon five-year
bond at par. As is standard for corporate bonds, the BRWA bond yield is calculated on a 30/360 day count basis. The comparable five-year US Treasury bond
yields 2.3%, but as a government bond, the yield is calculated using the actual/
actual day count basis. While the yield difference appears to be 90 bps (= 3.2%
вҖ“ 2.3%), the day count bases differ.
Calculate the government equivalent yield for the BRWA bond and show
the yield difference between the BRWA and government bonds based on the
same day count basis.
Solution:
A simple approximation for restating a corporate bond yield from the 30/360
day count basis to the actual/actual day count basis is to multiply the BRWA
bond yield by 365/360.
365

	вҖӢYiel вҖӢdACT/ACT
вҖӢ
вҖӢ= _
вҖӢ360 вҖӢГ— Yiel вҖӢd30/360
вҖӢ
вҖӢ.вҖӢ
365

вҖӢ= _
вҖӢ360 вҖӢГ— 0.032.вҖӢ
	вҖӢYiel вҖӢdACT/ACT
вҖӢ
	вҖӢYiel вҖӢdвҖӢACT/ACTвҖӢ = 3.244 % .вҖӢ

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
Other Yield Measures, Conventions, and Accounting for Embedded Options

The bond equivalent yield for the BRWA bond is 3.2444%; hence, the
yield-to-maturity difference between two bonds is 94.4 bps (= 3.2444% вҖ“ 2.3%).
Sometimes the simple yield on a bond is quoted. It is the sum of the coupon payments plus the straight-line amortized share of the gain or loss, divided by the flat price.
Simple yields are used mostly to quote Japanese government bonds, known as JGBs.

Exhibit 3: Summary of Yield Conventions
Convention

Meaning

Actual/Actual
(Act/Act)

Actual number of days from prior coupon payment to settlement
date/number of days in a coupon period, assuming the actual number
of days in a year. Typically used with government bonds.

30/360

Number of days from prior coupon payment to settlement date,
assuming 30 days in a month/number of days in a coupon period,
assuming 360 days in a year. Typically used with corporate bonds.

Street Convention

Yield measure that does not account for weekends and bank holidays
and thus assumes cash flows are paid on their scheduled dates.

True Yield

Yield measure that accounts for weekends and bank holidays and thus
assumes cash flows are paid after their scheduled dates. True yield is
never higher than street convention yield due to the delay in time to
payment.

Government
Equivalent Yield

Yield measure that restates a yield-to-maturity based on a 30/360 day
count to one based on an actual/actual day count. It is used to restate
the YTM on a corporate bond to obtain the spread over the government YTM.

Simple Yield

Yield measure that is the sum of coupon payments plus the
straight-line amortized share of the gain or loss, divided by the flat
price. It is used mostly to quote Japanese government bonds (JGBs).

EXAMPLE 5

Comparing Yields for Different Periodicities
An analyst observes the following reported statistics for two bonds.
вҖӢ

Antelas AG Bond

BRWA
Bond

3.20%

2.50%

Coupon Payment Frequency

Quarterly

Semiannually

Years to Maturity

5 Years

5 Years

94

98.70

3.40%

2.53%

4.548%

2.780%

Annual Coupon Rate

Price (per 100 of par value)
Current Yield
Yield-to-Maturity
вҖӢ

1. Confirm the calculation of the current yield and yield-to-maturity for
the two bonds.

165

166

Learning Module 7

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
Yield and Yield Spread Measures for Fixed-Rate Bonds

2. The analyst believes that the BRWA bond has less risk than the
Antelas AG bond. How much additional compensation, in terms of
basis points of yield-to-maturity, does a buyer of the Antelas AG bond
receive for bearing this risk compared with the BRWA bond?
Solution to 1:
Recall that the current yield is the annual coupon expressed as a percentage
of a bondвҖҷs flat price.
Annual coupon

	вҖӢCurrent yield = ___________
вҖӢвҖҜвҖҜ
Flat price вҖӢ.
Current yield for Antelas AG bond:
3.20

CY = _
вҖӢ 94 .вҖӢ
	вҖӢ
вҖӢ
вҖӢ
CY = 0.0340 = 3.40 % .
Current yield for BRWA bond:
2.50

CY = вҖӢ_
98.70 вҖӢ.вҖӢ
	вҖӢвҖҜвҖҜ
вҖӢ
CY = 0.0253 = 2.53 % .
Recall that the yield-to-maturity is an internal rate of return, the discount
rate r that equates the price of a bond to the present value of future cash flows.
PV = PMT1/(1 + r)1 + PMT2/(1 + r)2 + вҖҰ + (PMTN + FVN)/(1 + r)N.
The yield-to-maturity can also be calculated using the YIELD and IRR functions in Microsoft Excel or Google Sheets.
вҖӢ

Antelas AG Bond

BRWA Bond

Settlement date

1/1/2000 Settlement date

1/1/2000

Maturity date

1/1/2005 Maturity date

1/1/2005

Coupon

0.032 Coupon

0.025

Price

94 Price

98.7

Redemption

100 Redemption

100

Coupon frequency
YIELD

4 Coupon frequency
4.548% YIELD

2
2.780%

вҖӢ

Solution to 2:
The yields-to-maturity on the two bonds have different periodicity assumptions. Therefore, the difference in the yields is not 177 bps (0.04548 вҖ“ 0.02780).
It is essential to compare the yields for the same periodicity to make a statement
about relative value.
The Antelas AG bond yield-to-maturity of 4.548% for a periodicity of 4
converts to 4.574% for a periodicity of 2:
m

n

вҖӢ m вҖӢ)вҖӢ вҖӢ = (
вҖӢ 1+_
вҖӢ n )
вҖӢ вҖӢ вҖӢ.вҖӢ
	вҖӢ(1 + _
AP вҖӢRвҖӢmвҖӢ

AP вҖӢRвҖӢnвҖӢ

AP вҖӢRвҖӢ вҖӢ 2

	вҖӢ(1 + _
вҖӢ 4 вҖӢ)вҖӢ вҖӢ = (
вҖӢ 1+_
вҖӢ 2 2 вҖӢ)вҖӢ вҖӢ.вҖӢ
0.04548 4

	вҖӢAP вҖӢRвҖӢ2вҖӢ = 0.04574 = 4.574 % .вҖӢ

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
Other Yield Measures, Conventions, and Accounting for Embedded Options

When the yields-to-maturity for the Antelas AG and BRWA bonds are stated
on a common periodicity, the additional yield that the buyer of the BRWA bond
receives to compensate for its higher risk, compared to the Antelas AG bond,
is (0.04574 вҖ“ 0.02780) =179 bps.

Bonds with Embedded Options
If a fixed-rate bond contains an embedded option, other yield measures are used.
Recall from an earlier lesson that these bond contingency provisions cannot be
removed and traded separately from the bond. For example, a callable bond gives the
issuer the right to buy the bond back from the investor. This occurs at specific prices
on pre-determined dates after a call protection period during which the issuer is not
allowed to exercise the call option.
For example, an earlier lesson on callable bonds introduced Vivivyu Inc. (VIVU)
seven-year callable notes (see Exhibit 4).

Exhibit 4: 6.5% VIVU Seven-Year Callable Notes Term Sheet
6.5% Vivivyu Inc. (VIVU) Seven-Year Callable Notes (The вҖңNotesвҖқ)
Prospectus Summary
Issuer:

Vivivyu Incorporated

Settlement Date:

[T + 3 Business Days]

Maturity Date:

[Seven Years from Settlement Date]

Principal Amount:

US$ 400 million

Interest:

6.5% fixed coupon

Interest Payment:

Starting six months from [Settlement] to be paid semiannually
with final payment on [Maturity]

Seniority:

The Notes are secured and unsubordinated obligations of
VIVU and rank pari passu with all other secured and unsubordinated debt

Call Provision:

The Issuer may redeem some or all of the Notes on any
Business Day before [Maturity] starting three years after
[Settlement] based upon the Call Price Schedule as a percentage of the Principal Amount plus accrued interest

Call Price Schedule:

103.25% [Three to Four Years after Settlement]
102.50% [Four to Five Years after Settlement]
101.75% [Five to Six Years after Settlement]
101.00% [Six to Seven Years after Settlement]

The VIVU bond may not be called for the first three years, but the following year it
may be called at a price of $103.25 per $100 in face value. VIVU has the right to call
the bond for the final four years based on a fixed price schedule. Investors facing call
risk starting in Year 3 often estimate the lowest possible yield earned by calculating
the sequence of yields corresponding to the bondвҖҷs call dates.
Traditional yield-to-maturity measures assume that all cash flows occur as promised and therefore must be modified for callable bonds. Analysts must use alternative
return measures that take the bondвҖҷs call feature into account, such as the yield to
the first call date, the second call date, and so on. The yield-to-call is calculated by
modifying the general formula for calculating yield-to-maturity.

167

168

Learning Module 7

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
Yield and Yield Spread Measures for Fixed-Rate Bonds

PMT + Call price
вҖӢ(1 + r)вҖӢ вҖӢ

	вҖӢPV = _
вҖӢ PMT 1 вҖӢ+ _
вҖӢ PMT 2 вҖӢ+ ... + _____________
вҖӢвҖҜвҖҜ
вҖӢ,вҖӢ	
N
вҖӢ(1 + r)вҖӢ вҖӢ

вҖӢ(1 + r)вҖӢ вҖӢ

(3)

where
PV = the price of the bond
PMT = coupon payment per period
Call price = price at which a bond can be called on a given date
r = yield per period or market discount rate
N = number of evenly spaced periods to the date when a bond can be
called at the call price
EXAMPLE 6

Yields-to-Call for the VIVU Bond
Assuming the call price schedule for the VIVU bond, the calculation of yields-tofirst, -second, -third, -fourth, and -worst call and yield-to-maturity are as follows:
Yield-to-first call:
3.25
вҖӢ(1 + r)вҖӢ вҖӢ

3.25
вҖӢ(1 + r)вҖӢ вҖӢ

3.25
вҖӢ(1 + r)вҖӢ вҖӢ

3.25
вҖӢ(1 + r)вҖӢ вҖӢ

3.25
вҖӢ(1 + r)вҖӢ вҖӢ

103.25 + 3.25
вҖӢ(1 + r)вҖӢ вҖӢ

_ _ _ _ _
вҖӢ.вҖӢ
	вҖӢ106.50 = _
вҖӢ
5 вҖӢ+ вҖӢ
1 вҖӢ+ вҖӢ
2 вҖӢ+ вҖӢ
3 вҖӢ+ вҖӢ
4 вҖӢ+ вҖӢ
6

	вҖӢr = 0.025748 Г— 2 = 0.0515.вҖӢ
Alternatively, the YIELD function in Microsoft Excel or Google Sheets can
be used.
Yield-to-second call:
3.25

3.25

3.25

3.25

3.25

3.25

3.25

3.25

3.25

3.25

3.25

3.25

106.50 = _
вҖӢ
вҖӢ+ _
вҖӢ
вҖӢ+ _
вҖӢ
вҖӢ+ _
вҖӢ
вҖӢ+ _
вҖӢ
вҖӢ+ _
вҖӢ
вҖӢ
вҖӢ(1 + r)вҖӢ1вҖӢ вҖӢ(1 + r)вҖӢ2вҖӢ вҖӢ(1 + r)вҖӢ3вҖӢ вҖӢ(1 + r)вҖӢ4вҖӢ вҖӢ(1 + r)вҖӢ5вҖӢ вҖӢ(1 + r)вҖӢ6вҖӢ
	вҖӢ
вҖӢ
вҖҜвҖҜвҖҜвҖҜвҖҜвҖҜ
вҖӢ
3.25 102.50 + 3.25
+ вҖӢ_7 _
вҖӢ
.вҖӢ
8
вҖӢ(1 + r)вҖӢ вҖӢ

вҖӢ(1 + r)вҖӢ вҖӢ

	вҖӢr = 0.026237 Г— 2 = 0.0525.вҖӢ
Yield-to-third call:
3.25

3.25

вҖӢ(1 + r)вҖӢ вҖӢ

вҖӢ(1 + r)вҖӢ вҖӢ

вҖӢ
вҖӢ+ _
вҖӢ
вҖӢ+ _
вҖӢ
вҖӢ+ _
вҖӢ
вҖӢ+ _
вҖӢ
вҖӢ
106.50 = вҖӢ_1 вҖӢ+ _
вҖӢ(1 + r)вҖӢ вҖӢ вҖӢ(1 + r)вҖӢ2вҖӢ вҖӢ(1 + r)вҖӢ3вҖӢ вҖӢ(1 + r)вҖӢ4вҖӢ вҖӢ(1 + r)вҖӢ5вҖӢ вҖӢ(1 + r)вҖӢ6вҖӢ
вҖӢ
вҖҜвҖҜвҖҜвҖҜвҖҜвҖҜ
вҖӢ
	вҖӢ
101.75
+ 3.25
3.25
3.25
3.25
_
_
+ вҖӢ_7 вҖӢ+ _
вҖӢ
8 вҖӢ+ вҖӢ
9 вҖӢ+ вҖӢ
10 вҖӢ.
вҖӢ(1 + r)вҖӢ вҖӢ

вҖӢ(1 + r)вҖӢ вҖӢ

	вҖӢr = 0.02653 Г— 2 = 0.0531.вҖӢ
Yield-to-fourth call:
3.25

3.25

3.25

3.25

вҖӢ(1 + r)вҖӢ вҖӢ

вҖӢ(1 + r)вҖӢ вҖӢ

вҖӢ(1 + r)вҖӢ вҖӢ

вҖӢ(1 + r)вҖӢ вҖӢ

106.50 = вҖӢ_1 вҖӢ+ _
вҖӢ
вҖӢ+ _
вҖӢ
вҖӢ+ _
вҖӢ
вҖӢ+ _
вҖӢ
вҖӢ+ _
вҖӢ
вҖӢ
вҖӢ(1 + r)вҖӢ вҖӢ вҖӢ(1 + r)вҖӢ2вҖӢ вҖӢ(1 + r)вҖӢ3вҖӢ вҖӢ(1 + r)вҖӢ4вҖӢ вҖӢ(1 + r)вҖӢ5вҖӢ вҖӢ(1 + r)вҖӢ6вҖӢ
	вҖӢ
вҖҜвҖҜвҖҜвҖҜвҖҜвҖҜ
вҖӢвҖӢ
3.25
3.25
3.25
3.25
3.25
101.00
+ 3.25
_
_
_
_
+ вҖӢ_7 вҖӢ+ _
вҖӢ
8 вҖӢ+ вҖӢ
9 вҖӢ+ вҖӢ
10 вҖӢ+ вҖӢ
11 вҖӢ+ вҖӢ
12 вҖӢ.
вҖӢ(1 + r)вҖӢ вҖӢ

вҖӢ(1 + r)вҖӢ вҖӢ

	вҖӢr = 0.026811 Г— 2 = 0.0536.вҖӢ
And finally, the yield-to-maturity assuming the bond is not called:

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
Other Yield Measures, Conventions, and Accounting for Embedded Options

3.25
3.25
3.25
3.25
3.25
3.25
вҖӢ(1 + r)вҖӢ вҖӢ вҖӢ(1 + r)вҖӢ вҖӢ вҖӢ(1 + r)вҖӢ вҖӢ вҖӢ(1 + r)вҖӢ вҖӢ вҖӢ(1 + r)вҖӢ вҖӢ вҖӢ(1 + r)вҖӢ вҖӢ
3.25
3.25
3.25
3.25
3.25
3.25
+	вҖӢ вҖӢ_7 вҖӢ+ _
вҖӢ
вҖӢ+ _
вҖӢ
вҖӢ
+_
вҖӢ
вҖӢ+ _
вҖӢ
вҖӢ+ _
вҖӢ
вҖӢ
вҖҜвҖҜвҖҜвҖҜвҖҜ
вҖҜвҖҜвҖҜвҖҜвҖҜвҖҜ
вҖӢ вҖӢ
вҖӢ(1 + r)вҖӢ вҖӢ вҖӢ(1 + r)вҖӢ8вҖӢ вҖӢ(1 + r)вҖӢ9
вҖӢ
вҖӢ(1 + r)вҖӢ10вҖӢ вҖӢ(1 + r)вҖӢ11вҖӢ вҖӢ(1 + r)вҖӢ12вҖӢ
3.25
100.00 + 3.25
+ вҖӢ_
вҖӢ+ _
вҖӢ
.вҖӢ
вҖӢ(1 + r)вҖӢ13вҖӢ
вҖӢ(1 + r)вҖӢ14вҖӢ
_ _ _ _ _
106.50 = _
вҖӢ
5 вҖӢ+ вҖӢ
1 вҖӢ+ вҖӢ
2 вҖӢ+ вҖӢ
3 вҖӢ+ вҖӢ
4 вҖӢ+ вҖӢ
6вҖӢ

	вҖӢr = 0.026868 Г— 2 = 0.0537.вҖӢ
In summary, the yield measures for the VIVU bond are as follows:
вҖӢ

Yield-to-first call

5.149%

Yield-to-second call

5.247%

Yield-to-third call

5.313%

Yield-to-fourth call

5.362%

Yield-to-maturity

5.374%
вҖӢ

The lowest of the sequence of yields-to-call and the yield-to-maturity is known
as the yield-to-worst. For the VIVU bond, it is the yield-to-first call of 5.15%. The
intent of this measure is to provide to the investor the most conservative measure
for the rate of return.
The yield-to-worst is a commonly cited yield measure for fixed-rate callable bonds
used by bond dealers and investors. However, a more precise approach is to use an
option pricing model and an assumption about future interest rate volatility to value
the embedded call option. The value of the embedded call option is added to the flat
price of the bond to get the option-adjusted price. The investor bears the call risk
(the bond issuer has the option to call), so the embedded call option reduces the
value of the bond from the investorвҖҷs perspective. The investor pays a lower price for
the callable bond than if it were option-free. If the bond were non-callable, its price
would be higher. The option-adjusted price is used to calculate the option-adjusted
yield. The option-adjusted yield is the required market discount rate whereby the
price is adjusted for the value of the embedded option. The value of the call option is
the price of the option-free bond minus the price of the callable bond.
QUESTION SET
1. Identify which of the following yield measures corresponds to the
characteristics listed below.
вҖӢ

Yield Measure

Characteristic

A. Simple Yield

1. Yield measure assuming one compounding
period per year

B. Effective Annual Rate

2. Yield measure that restates a yield based on a
30/360 day count to one based on an actual/actual
day count

169

170

Learning Module 7

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
Yield and Yield Spread Measures for Fixed-Rate Bonds

Yield Measure

Characteristic

C. Street Convention Yield

3. Yield measure that is the sum of coupon payments plus the straight-line amortized share of the
gain or loss, divided by the flat price

D. Government Equivalent
Yield

4. Assumes cash flows are paid on their scheduled
dates, without accounting for weekends and bank
holidays
вҖӢ

Solution:
вҖӢ

Yield Measure

Characteristic

B. Effective Annual Rate

1. Yield measure assuming one compounding
period in the year

D. Government Equivalent
Yield

2. Yield measure that restates a yield-to-maturity
based on a 30/360 day count to one based on an
actual/actual day count

A. Simple Yield

3. Yield measure that is the sum of coupon payments plus the straight-line amortized share of
the gain or loss, divided by the flat price

C. Street Convention Yield

4. Assumes cash flows are paid on their scheduled dates, without accounting for weekends and
bank holidays
вҖӢ

2. An analyst calculated the following yields for a four-year callable bond. Determine the yield-to-worst.
вҖӢ

Yield Measure

Value

Yield-to-first call

0.000%

Yield-to-second call

0.157%

Yield-to-third call

0.939%

Yield-to-maturity

вҖ“0.385%
вҖӢ

Solution:
вҖ“0.3852%. The yield-to-worst is the lowest of the sequence of yields-to-call
and the yield-to-maturity. The intent of yield-to-worst is to provide to the
investor the most conservative assumption for the rate of return.
Use the following information compiled by a fixed-income analyst for two bonds,
on the day both were issued, to answer Questions 3 and 4.
вҖӢ

Corporate Bond

Sovereign Bond

Annual coupon rate

4.00%

1.00%

Coupon frequency

Semiannual

Quarterly

Years to maturity

3 Years

3 Years

91

102

30/360

Actual/actual

101.25 1вҖ“2 Years after
settlement

-

Price (per 100 of par)
Day-count basis
Call price schedule:

вҖӢ

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
Yield Spread Measures for Fixed-Rate Bonds and Matrix Pricing

171

3. The current yield of the sovereign bond is approximately:
A. 140 bps lower than the current yield of the corporate bond.
B. 340 bps lower than the current yield of the corporate bond.
C. 140 bps higher than the current yield of the corporate bond.
Solution:
B is correct. The current yield is the annual coupon expressed as a percentage of a bondвҖҷs price. The current yield of the corporate bond is 440 bps,
while the current yield of the sovereign bond is 98 bps, 342 bps lower.
4. The yield-to-first call of the corporate bond is closest to:
A. 2.15%.
B. 7.80%.
C. 15.00%.
Solution:
C is correct. The yield-to-first call is the internal rate of return r for a callable bond assuming it is called at its earliest scheduled call date for its call
price.
PMT + Callprice
вҖӢ(1 + r)вҖӢ вҖӢ

вҖӢ PMT 2 вҖӢ+ ... + ____________
вҖӢвҖҜвҖҜ
вҖӢ.вҖӢ
	вҖӢPV = _
вҖӢ PMT 1 вҖӢ+ _
N
вҖӢ(1 + r)вҖӢ вҖӢ

вҖӢ(1 + r)вҖӢ вҖӢ

101.5 + 2
вҖӢ(1 + r)вҖӢ вҖӢ

2
_
	вҖӢ91 = вҖӢ_
1 вҖӢ+ вҖӢ
2 вҖӢ.вҖӢ
вҖӢ(1 + r)вҖӢ вҖӢ

	вҖӢr = 0.0762 Г— 2 = 0.1512.вҖӢ
The yield-to-first call for the bond is 15.12%.

YIELD SPREAD MEASURES FOR FIXED-RATE BONDS
AND MATRIX PRICING
compare, calculate, and interpret yield and yield spread measures for
fixed-rate bonds

Yield Spreads over Benchmark Rates
In fixed-income security analysis, it is important to understand why bond prices and
yields-to-maturity change. To do this, it is useful to decompose a yield-to-maturity
into a base rate or benchmark and an issuer-specific spread. For example, an earlier
lesson introduced government benchmark bonds as the most liquid securities with the
lowest default risk for a specific time-to-maturity in each market. The yield spread
is the difference between the yield-to-maturity and the benchmark yield.
These two components help investors distinguish between macroeconomic
(top-down) and microeconomic (bottom-up) factors that affect the bond price and,
therefore, its yield-to-maturity. The benchmark rate captures the top-down factors,
while the spread captures the bottom-up factors, as shown in Exhibit 5.

4

172

Learning Module 7

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
Yield and Yield Spread Measures for Fixed-Rate Bonds

Exhibit 5: Yield-to-Maturity Components
Taxation
Spread

Risk Premium

Liquidity
Credit Risk

Expected Inflation
Rate
Benchmark

вҖңRisk-FreeвҖқ Rate of
Return
Expected Real
Rate

The most used benchmark rate is the most recently issued government bond, known
as an on-the-run security. The on-the-run government bond is the most actively
traded security and has a coupon rate closest to the current market discount rate for
that maturity. That implies that it is priced close to par value. Seasoned government
bonds are called off-the-run. On-the-run bonds typically trade at slightly lower
yields-to-maturity than off-the-run bonds with the same or similar times-to-maturity
because of differences in demand for the securities and, sometimes, differences in the
cost of financing the government security in the repo market.
The yield spread over a specific benchmark is referred to as the benchmark
spread and represents the risk premium for the credit and liquidity risks and possibly
the tax impact of holding a specific bond. Exhibit 6 shows the relationship between
yields-to-maturity for a specific issuer and a benchmark government yield curve.

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
Yield Spread Measures for Fixed-Rate Bonds and Matrix Pricing

Exhibit 6: Issuer and Government Yield Curves
Yield (%)

4.0
Yield Spread
Over Treasuries

3.5
3.0
2.5
2.0

On-the-Run
Treasuries

1.5
1.0
0
2 3

5

7

10

20

Term

Spreads allow an analyst to better assess a bondвҖҷs relative value on a historical and
comparative basis by controlling for (excluding) macroeconomic factors, such as a
broad increase or decrease in benchmark rates. An analyst might compare the current
spread relative to its historical average and its past highs and lows and to other bonds
to help identify whether a bond is under- or overpriced on a relative basis.
The yield spread in basis points over an actual or interpolated government bond
yield is known as the G-spread and represents the return for bearing risks relative to
the sovereign bond. If there is no sovereign benchmark bond that matches the maturity of the bond, an approximation process for finding the G-spread must be used, as
illustrated in Exhibit 7 and shown in the following example.

Exhibit 7: Finding G-Spreads When a Comparable Benchmark Bond Does
Not Exist
Step 1
Step 2
Calculate the bondвҖҷs
current YTM.

Step 3
Linearly interpolate current
rates (YTMs) for the
sovereign benchmark bonds
with maturities closest to
(below/above) the given
bondвҖҷs maturity, to find
an approximate sovereign
rate matching the given
bondвҖҷs maturity.

G-spread is difference
between the bondвҖҷs
current YTM and the
interpolated (appproximate)
sovereign
benchmark rate.

173

174

Learning Module 7

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
Yield and Yield Spread Measures for Fixed-Rate Bonds

EXAMPLE 7

Calculating G-Spread without a Comparable Benchmark
Bond
Assume that the Russian Federation has issued a 30-year US dollarвҖ“denominated
sovereign bond based on the following terms:
вҖӢ

5.25% Russian Federation Bonds
Brief Summary of Terms
Issuer:

Russian Federation

Settlement Date:

[T + 5 Business Days]

Maturity Date:

[30 Years from Settlement Date]

Principal Amount:

USD 750 million

Interest:

5.25% fixed semiannual 30/360 basis

Issuance Price:

99.625

Issuance Spread:

200 bp versus current US 30y Treasury

Issuance and Trading:

US Private Placement under Rule 144A
DTC / Euroclear / Clearstream

Seniority:

Senior Unsecured

Exchanges:

Luxembourg
вҖӢ

Six years after the original issuance date, on 15 March 2026, the bond is
trading at a price of 123.5 per 100 face value, and an analyst observes that 20-year
and 30-year US Treasury yields are currently 2.00% and 2.25%, respectively.
Calculate the current G-spread of the Russian Federation bond.
Step 1

Calculate the current yield-to-maturity of the Russian Federation
bond. We may solve for r using the general formula for bond price
and yield:

PV = PMT1/(1 + r)1 + PMT2/(1 + r)2 + вҖҰ + (PMTN + FVN)/(1 + r)N.

Or we can use the Excel or Google Sheets YIELD function assuming a settlement date of 15 March 2026:
=YIELD(DATE(2026,3,15),DATE(2050,3,15),5.25%,123.5,100,2,0)
= 3.756%.
Step 2

Linearly interpolate the current 20-year (r20y) and 30-year (r30y) US
Treasury yields to solve for an approximate 24-year (r24y) US Treasury
benchmark:

1. Solve for the weights of the 20-year and the 30-year bonds in the
interpolation calculation:
20-year bond weight = w20 = 60% [= (30 вҖ“ 24)/(30 вҖ“ 20)].
30-year bond weight = w30 = 40%, or (1 вҖ“ w20).
Note that (w20 Г— 20) + (w30 Г— 30) = 24.

2. The 24-year government rate is a weighted average of the 20-year
bond rate and the 30-year US Treasury rate using the weights
above.
r24y = w20 Г— r20y + w30 Г— r30y

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
Yield Spread Measures for Fixed-Rate Bonds and Matrix Pricing

= (60% Г— 2.00%) + (40% Г— 2.25%) = 2.10%.
Step 3

The G-spread is the difference between the current Russian
Federation bond yield-to-maturity and the 24-year US government
rate:

1.656% = 3.756% вҖ“ 2.10%, so the G-spread is 166 bps.
The yield spread for a bond over the standard swap rate in that currency of the
same tenor is known as the I-spread or interpolated spread. This type of spread is a
comparison against a short-term market-based reference rate and is common practice
for pricing and quoting euro-denominated corporate bonds, using a euro interest rate
swap as the benchmark. For example, the five-year zero-coupon euro bond issued
by the Chinese government at a negative yield-to-maturity from a prior lesson was
priced at a rate of вҖңmid-swaps plus 30 bps,вҖқ where вҖңmid-swapsвҖқ is the average of the
bid and offered swap rates.
Issuers will use the I-spread to determine the relative cost of fixed-rate bonds
versus floating-rate alternatives, such as a bank loan or commercial paper, while
investors use it as a measure of a bondвҖҷs credit risk. Whereas a standard interest rate
swap involves an exchange of fixed for floating cash flows based on a floating index, an
asset swap converts the periodic fixed coupon of a specific bond to a market reference
rate (MRR) plus or minus a spread. If the bond is priced close to par, this conversion
approximates the price of a bondвҖҷs credit risk over the MRR index.
EXAMPLE 8

Yield Spreads Using Bloomberg Fixed-Income Relative
Value (FIRV)
The Bloomberg FIRV function for the 3.75% Apple bond that matures on 12
September 2047 shows the following. Identify the yield and yield spread measures.
вҖӢ

FIRV Function for 3.75% AAPL Bond Maturing 12 September 2047
вҖӢ

AAPL 3 34

09/12/47

82.439/83.193
BVAL as of

Corp

Settings

4.988/4.928

Fixed Income Relative Value
BMRK@ 13:19

Spread

Low

Range
Avg

1) Spreads to Curves (RV)

96) Sell

95) Buy
11-Jan-2021

06/11/2021

Custom

11-Jun-2021

High

Avg +/вҖ“

bps

StdDev

#SDs

Now

2) Spreads-Bench

72

69

89

78

вҖ“6

5

вҖ“1.2

3) G-Spread

76

73

96

84

вҖ“8

6

вҖ“1.4

4) I-Spread

106

94

122

109

вҖ“3

6

вҖ“0.5

5) Z-Spread

109

96

125

112

вҖ“3

6

вҖ“0.5

Avg +/вҖ“

bps

#SDs

6) Credit Rel Value (CRVD)
7) CDS Basis
Z-Spd

8) Bond vs Comparables (COMB)
AAPL 3 34

09/47

Difference in comparable Z-Spreads over date range

Price

Yield

Spread

Diff

Lo

2.87
2.88

109
118

Range

Hi

9) INTC 4.6

03/40

115.9
124.3

вҖ“9

вҖ“17

13

вҖ“4

вҖ“5

вҖ“0.7

10) TXN 3 78
11) ORCL 3.6

03/39

118.1

2.57

87

22

13

32

25

вҖ“3

вҖ“1.0

04/40

104.4

3.28

156

вҖ“47

вҖ“53

вҖ“7

вҖ“32

вҖ“15

вҖ“0.8

12) MSI 5

1
2

09/44

128.4

3.67

194

вҖ“85 вҖ“135

вҖ“83

вҖ“103

18

1.3

13) HPE 6.35

10/45

133.7

4.11

240

вҖ“131 вҖ“188

вҖ“121

вҖ“138

7

0.4

14) HPE 6.35

10/45

133.7

4.11

240

вҖ“131 вҖ“188

вҖ“121

вҖ“138

7

0.4

3.44

173

вҖ“64

вҖ“55

вҖ“65

2

0.2

115.9

2.87

Avg of Comparables
15) BVAL Price

Australia 61 2 9777 8600
Japan 81 3 4565 8900

Brazil 5511 2395 9000
Singapore 65 6212 1000

вҖ“89

Europe 44 20 7330 7500
U.S. 1 212 318 2000

Hong Kong 852 2977 6000
Germany 49 69 9204 1210
Copyright 2022 Bloomberg Finance L.P.
SN 2363375
H462вҖ“2316вҖ“173
05-OCt-22
13:21:55

В© 2021 Bloomberg L.P. All rights reserved. Reproduced with permission.

Solution:

EDT

GMTвҖ“4:00

175

176

Learning Module 7

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
Yield and Yield Spread Measures for Fixed-Rate Bonds

The yield spreads are in the top left corner. On the date of analysis:
в– 

The yield spread over a particular Treasury benchmark was 72 bps.

в– 

The G-spread over an interpolated government bond yield was 76 bps.
The spread over the benchmark and the G-spread sometimes differ by
a few basis points, especially if the benchmark maturity differs from
that of the underlying bond.

в– 

The bondвҖҷs I-spread was 106 bps. An I-spread larger than the G-spread
indicates that Treasury yields were slightly higher than swap rates at
that time.

The use of these spreads in investment strategies will be covered in more
detail later. In general, an analyst will track these spreads relative to their averages
and historical highs and lows to identify relative value.

Yield Spreads over the Benchmark Yield Curve
Whereas the G-spread and I-spread are the difference between two single numbers
and use the same discount rate (yield-to-maturity) for each cash flow, a different
approach is to calculate a constant yield spread over a government (or interest rate
swap) spot curve, or series of yields. This spread is known as the zero-volatility spread
(Z-spread) of a bond over the benchmark rate. In other words, the Z-spread is what
must be added to each benchmark spot rate to make the present value of a bondвҖҷs
cash flows equal its price. In Example 8, the Z-spread for the Apple bond, as quoted
using the Bloomberg FIRV function, was 109 bps.
The Z-spread over the benchmark spot curve can be calculated with Equation 4:
PMT + FV

	вҖӢPV = _
вҖӢ PMT 1 вҖӢ+ _
вҖӢ PMT вҖӢ+ вӢҜ + _
вҖӢ
вҖӢ.вҖӢ	
вҖӢ(1 + вҖӢzвҖӢNвҖӢ+ Z)вҖӢNвҖӢ
вҖӢ(1 + вҖӢzвҖӢ1вҖӢ+ Z)вҖӢ вҖӢ вҖӢ(1 + вҖӢzвҖӢ2вҖӢ+ Z)вҖӢ2вҖӢ

(4)

The benchmark spot or zero ratesвҖ”z1, z2, . . . , zNвҖ”are derived from the government
yield curve (or from fixed rates on interest rate swaps), as shown in detail in a later
lesson. Z is the Z-spread per period and is the same for all time periods. In Equation
4, N is an integer, so the calculation is on a coupon date when the accrued interest is
zero. Sometimes, the Z-spread is called the вҖңstatic spreadвҖқ because it is constant (and
has zero volatility). In practice, the Z-spread is usually calculated in a spreadsheet
using a goal seek function or similar solver function.
The Z-spread is also used to calculate the option-adjusted spread (OAS) on a
callable bond. The OAS, like the option-adjusted yield, is based on an option-pricing
model and an assumption about future interest rate volatility. Then, the value of the
embedded call option, which is stated in basis points per year, is subtracted from the
yield spread.
OAS = Z-spread вҖ“ Option value in basis points per year.
This important measure is covered in detail later.

(5)

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
Yield Spread Measures for Fixed-Rate Bonds and Matrix Pricing

Exhibit 8: Summary of Yield Spreads
Type

Description

G-spread

Government spread, the yield spread in basis points over an actual or
interpolated government bond. Used in the US, the UK, Japan, and
other jurisdictions.

I-spread

Interpolated spread, the yield spread of a bond over the standard swap
rate in the same currency and with the same tenor. Euro-denominated
corporate bonds are typically priced vs. a euro interest rate swap
benchmark.

Z-spread

Zero-volatility spread, a constant yield spread over a government (or
interest rate swap) spot curve used to derive the term structure of
credit spreads for an issuer.

Option-adjusted
spread

The Z-spread adjusted for the value of an embedded call option.

EXAMPLE 9

The G-Spread and Z-Spread
A 1.5% semiannual coupon, US dollarвҖ“denominated bond was issued by PT
Indonesia Infrastructure Finance (IIF) three years ago. Currently, the bond has
two years remaining to maturity and is trading at a price of 100.45. The twoyear, 0.75% semiannual payment government benchmark bond is trading at a
price of 100.750.
The government spot rates (stated as effective annual rates) are as follows:
вҖӢ

Maturity

Spot Rate

6M

0.127%

12M

0.249%

18M

0.314%

24M

0.373%
вҖӢ

1. Calculate the G-spread for the IIF bond.
2. Calculate the Z-spread for the IIF bond.
Solution:
The G-spread is the yield spread in basis points over an actual or interpolated
government bond. The yield-to-maturity for the IIF bond is 1.271%:
0.75

0.75

0.75

100.75

вҖӢ+ _
вҖӢ
вҖӢ+ _
вҖӢ
вҖӢ+ _
вҖӢ
вҖӢ.
100.45 = _
вҖӢ
вҖӢ(1 + r)вҖӢ1вҖӢ вҖӢ(1 + r)вҖӢ2вҖӢ вҖӢ(1 + r)вҖӢ3вҖӢ вҖӢ(1 + r)вҖӢ4вҖӢ вҖӢ
	вҖӢвҖҜвҖҜвҖҜвҖҜ
r = 0.006357 Г— 2 = 0.01271.
The yield-to-maturity for the relevant government benchmark bond is 0.373%:
0.375

0.375

0.375

100.375

вҖӢ+ _
вҖӢ
вҖӢ+ _
вҖӢ
вҖӢ+ _
вҖӢ
.вҖӢ
100.45 = _
вҖӢ
вҖӢ(1 + r)вҖӢ1вҖӢ вҖӢ(1
+ r)вҖӢ2вҖӢ вҖӢ(1 + r)вҖӢ3вҖӢ вҖӢ(1 + r)вҖӢ4вҖӢ вҖӢ
вҖҜвҖҜвҖҜвҖҜ
	вҖӢ
r = 0.0018662 Г— 2 = 0.00373.
Therefore, the G-spread is 0.01271 вҖ“ 0.00373 = 89 bps.
Solution:
The Z-spread is a constant yield spread over a government spot or interest
rate swap curve.

177

178

Learning Module 7

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
Yield and Yield Spread Measures for Fixed-Rate Bonds

The Z-spread for the IIF bond is the value of Z that solves the following
equation, using the government spot rates provided:
PMT + FV

PV = _
вҖӢ PMT 1 вҖӢ+ _
вҖӢ PMT 2 вҖӢ+ вӢҜ + _
вҖӢ
.вҖӢ
вҖӢ(1 + вҖӢzвҖӢNвҖӢ+ Z)вҖӢNвҖӢ
вҖӢ
1
+
z
вҖӢ
вҖӢ
вҖӢ
+
Z
вҖӢ
вҖӢ
вҖӢ(1 + вҖӢzвҖӢ2вҖӢ+ Z)вҖӢ вҖӢ
(
)
1
	вҖӢ
вҖӢвҖҜвҖҜвҖҜвҖҜвҖҜвҖӢ

вҖӢ

0.75
0.75
0.75
100.75
100.45 = ______________
вҖӢвҖҜвҖҜвҖӢ+ ______________
вҖӢвҖҜвҖҜвҖӢ+ ______________
вҖӢвҖҜвҖҜвҖӢ+ ______________
вҖӢвҖҜвҖҜ.вҖӢ
вҖӢ(1 + 0.00127 + Z)вҖӢ1вҖӢ вҖӢ(1 + 0.00249 + Z)вҖӢ2вҖӢ вҖӢ(1 + 0.00314 + Z)вҖӢ3вҖӢ вҖӢ(1 + 0.00373 + Z)вҖӢ4вҖӢ

The Solver add-in for Microsoft Excel finds Z = 0.00268, or 27 bps, by setting
the price (sum of present values of cash flows) equal to 100.45 as the objective
and Z as the change variable. Please refer to the candidate learning ecosystem
online for a spreadsheet demonstrating the calculation.
QUESTION SET
1. Each of the five items below is a risk of investing in fixed-income
instruments. For each, identify the component of yield-to-maturity that
provides compensation for that risk: benchmark or spread.
Credit
Expected Real Rate
Taxation
Expected Inflation Rate
Liquidity
вҖӢ

Benchmark

Spread

вҖӢ

Solution:
вҖӢ

Benchmark

Spread

Expected Real Rate

Credit Risk

Expected Inflation Rate

Taxation Risk
Liquidity Risk
вҖӢ

The two components of yieldвҖ”the benchmark and the spreadвҖ”allow us to
distinguish macroeconomic and microeconomic factors.
The benchmark yield captures the macroeconomic factors: the expected
rate of inflation in the currency in which the bond is denominated, general
economic growth and the business cycle, foreign exchange rates, and the
impact of monetary and fiscal policy. Changes in those factors impact all
bonds in the market.
The yield spread captures the microeconomic factors specific to the bond
issuer and the bond itself: credit risk, liquidity and trading in comparable
securities, and the tax status of the bond.

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
Yield Spread Measures for Fixed-Rate Bonds and Matrix Pricing

2. A Mexican corporate non-callable bond matures in three years and has an
annual coupon of 5.5%. The government spot rates (stated as effective annual rates) are as follows:
вҖӢ

Government Spot Rates
Maturity

Spot Rate

1Y

2.98%

2Y

3.48%

3Y

4.00%
вҖӢ

Using the provided spot rates and a Z-spread of 378 bps, calculate the price
of the Mexican corporate bond.
Solution:

The price of the bond is 94.20.
PMT + FV

	вҖӢPV = _
вҖӢ PMT 1 вҖӢ+ _
вҖӢ PMT вҖӢ+ вӢҜ + _
вҖӢ
вҖӢ.вҖӢ
вҖӢ(1 + вҖӢzвҖӢNвҖӢ+ Z)вҖӢNвҖӢ
вҖӢ(1 + вҖӢzвҖӢ1вҖӢ+ Z)вҖӢ вҖӢ вҖӢ(1 + вҖӢzвҖӢ2вҖӢ+ Z)вҖӢ2вҖӢ
5.5
вҖӢ(1 + 0.0298 + 0.0378)вҖӢ вҖӢ

5.5
вҖӢ(1 + 0.0348 + 0.0378)вҖӢ вҖӢ

105.5
вҖӢ(1 + 0.04 + 0.0378)вҖӢ вҖӢ

вҖӢвҖҜвҖҜ2 вҖӢ+ _______________
вҖӢвҖҜвҖҜ3 вҖӢ.вҖӢ
вҖӢPV = ________________
вҖӢвҖҜвҖҜ1 вҖӢ+ ________________
	вҖӢPV = 94.20.вҖӢ
Use the information provided for Questions 3 and 4.
A fixed-income analyst has compiled the following statistics for three corporate bonds issued by companies domiciled in three different countries.
вҖӢ

Bond

Yield-to-Maturity

Applicable Swap Rate

A

13.379%

12.419%

B

8.121%

6.527%

C

5.406%

4.184%
вҖӢ

3. Which bond most likely has the greatest credit risk?
A. Bond A
B. Bond B
C. Bond C
Solution:
B is correct. As a вҖңbottom-upвҖқ or issuer-specific risk factor, credit risk is a
component of a yield spread. To estimate which bond most likely has the
greatest credit risk, we calculate the I-spread, or the yield spread for a bond
over a swap rate for the same currency and tenor.
вҖӢ

Bond

Yield-to-Maturity

Applicable Swap Rate

I-Spread

A

13.379%

12.419%

96 bps

B

8.121%

6.527%

159 bps

C

5.406%

4.184%

122 bps

вҖӢ

4. Assume that the issuers of Bonds A, B, and C are comparable in terms of
credit risk and that the bonds have similar liquidity and tax characteristics.

179

180

Learning Module 7

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
Yield and Yield Spread Measures for Fixed-Rate Bonds

Based solely on the information provided, which bond might offer an investor the least relative value?
A. Bond A
B. Bond B
C. Bond C
Solution:
A is correct. If the bonds are judged to be comparable in all material respects, then the least (most) relative value corresponds to the bond with the
lowest (highest) spread. At 96 bps, Bond A has the lowest spread and thus
the least attractive valuation to an investor.
5. Match the following characteristics to on-the-run and off-the-run bonds:
в– 

Seasoned government bonds

в– 

Most recently issued government bonds

в– 

Has a coupon rate below or above the current market discount rate for
that maturity

в– 

Has a coupon rate closest to the current market discount rate for that
maturity

в– 

Trades at slightly lower yields-to-maturity compared to bonds with the
same or a similar time-to-maturity

в– 

Trades at slightly higher yields-to-maturity compared to bonds with
the same or a similar time-to-maturity

Solution:
вҖӢ

On-the-Run

Off-the-Run

Most recently issued government
bonds

Seasoned government bonds

Has a coupon rate closest to the
current market discount rate for that
maturity

Has a coupon rate below or above the
current market discount rate for that
maturity

Trades at slightly lower
yields-to-maturity compared to
bonds with the same or a similar
time-to-maturity

Trades at slightly higher
yields-to-maturity compared to
bonds with the same or a similar
time-to-maturity
вҖӢ

Practice Problems

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.

PRACTICE PROBLEMS
1. A bond issued by RTR pays a quarterly coupon of 3.25%, has three years to maturity, and is currently trading at 97.28. The semiannual bond basis yield is closest
to:
A. 1.055%.
B. 2.121%.
C. 4.242%.
2. An analyst is analyzing a three-year, 2.25% annual coupon bond issued by QWE
Company. Currently, the bondвҖҷs yield-to-maturity is 2.707%. The three-year swap
rate is 1.840%. The government spot rates are presented in the table.
Maturity

Government Spot
Rate

1Y

0.899%

2Y

1.260%

3Y

1.904%

The G-Spread (in basis points) for the QWE bond is closest to:
A. 80.
B. 87.
C. 135.
3. The I-spread (in basis points) for the QWE bond is closest to:
A. 46.
B. 80.
C. 87.
4. If the price of the QWE bond is 98.70% of par, its Z-spread (in basis points) is
closest to:
A. 80.
B. 82.
C. 87.
5. An analyst is analyzing a six-year callable bond with a semiannual coupon of

181

182

Learning Module 7

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
Yield and Yield Spread Measures for Fixed-Rate Bonds

2.50% trading at a price of 98.90 per 100 par value and the following call schedule:
Call Schedule
Period

Call Price

4вҖ“5 Years

101.50

5вҖ“6 Years

101.00

Match the yields below to the respective yield measures.
Yield

Yield Measure

2.6998%

Yield-to-first call

2.6998%

Yield-to-second call

2.9253%

Yield-to-maturity

3.1497%

Yield-to-worst

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.

Solutions

SOLUTIONS
1. C is correct. As a first step, we need to calculate the quarterly yield and annualize
it:
PMT + FV
вҖӢ(1 + r)вҖӢ вҖӢ

	вҖӢPV = _
вҖӢ PMT 1 вҖӢ+ _
вҖӢ PMT 2 вҖӢ+ ... + _
вҖӢ
N вҖӢ.вҖӢ
вҖӢ(1 + r)вҖӢ вҖӢ

вҖӢ(1 + r)вҖӢ вҖӢ

0.8125
вҖӢ(1 + r)вҖӢ вҖӢ

0.8125
вҖӢ(1 + r)вҖӢ вҖӢ

100.8125
вҖӢ(1 + r)вҖӢ вҖӢ

_
_
	вҖӢ97.28 = _
вҖӢ
1 вҖӢ+ вҖӢ
2 вҖӢ+ ... + вҖӢ
12 вҖӢ.вҖӢ

	вҖӢr = 0.01055 Г— 4 = 0.0422.вҖӢ
The next step is to convert the annualized quarterly yield to the semiannual bond
basis yield.
m

n

	вҖӢ(1 + _
вҖӢ n вҖӢ)вҖӢ вҖӢ.вҖӢ
вҖӢ m вҖӢ)вҖӢ вҖӢ = вҖӢ(1 + _
AP вҖӢRm
вҖӢвҖӢ

AP вҖӢRnвҖӢ вҖӢ

AP вҖӢRвҖӢ вҖӢ 2

	вҖӢ(1 + _
вҖӢ 4 )
вҖӢ вҖӢвҖӢ= (
вҖӢ 1+_
вҖӢ 2 2 вҖӢ)вҖӢ вҖӢ.вҖӢ
0.0422 4

	вҖӢAP вҖӢR2вҖӢ вҖӢ = 0.04242 = 4.242 % .вҖӢ
A is incorrect because 1.0550% is the yield per quarter.
B is incorrect because 2.1100% is the yield per quarter (1.0550%) multiplied by 2.
2. A is correct. The G-spread is a yield spread above that of a government bond with
the same maturity date. The yield-to-maturity for the corporate bond is 2.7070%.
The yield-to-maturity for the government benchmark bond is 1.9036%.
G-spread = 2.707% вҖ“ 1.904% = 0.8034% = 80.3 bps.
B is incorrect because 87 bps is the I-spread calculated as the yield spread of a
bond over the standard swap rate in the same currency and with the same tenor.
C is incorrect because 135 bps is the spread calculated as the difference between
the yield-to-maturity of the QWE bond and the average of government rates for
all maturities.
3. C is correct. The I-spread is the yield spread of a bond over the standard swap
rate in the same currency and with the same tenor. The yield-to-maturity for the
corporate bond is 2.707%, and the swap rate for the same maturity is 1.840%.
I-spread = 2.707% вҖ“ 1.840% = 0.867% = 87 bps.
A is incorrect because 46 bps is the difference between the bondвҖҷs
yield-to-maturity and coupon rate.
2.707% вҖ“ 2.250% = 0.457% = 46 bps.
B is incorrect because 80 bps is the G-spreadвҖ”the yield-to-maturity for the corporate bond less the yield-to-maturity for the government benchmark bond.
G-spread = 2.707% вҖ“ 1.904% = 80 bps.
4. B is correct. To calculate the Z-spread, we must solve for Z in the following equation, given the spot rates and price of the bond:
PMT + FV

	вҖӢPV = _
вҖӢ PMT 1 вҖӢ+ _
вҖӢ PMT вҖӢ+ вӢҜ + _
вҖӢ
вҖӢ.вҖӢ
вҖӢ(1 + вҖӢzвҖӢNвҖӢ+ Z)вҖӢNвҖӢ
вҖӢ(1 + вҖӢzвҖӢ1вҖӢ+ Z)вҖӢ вҖӢ вҖӢ(1 + вҖӢzвҖӢ2вҖӢ+ Z)вҖӢ2вҖӢ

183

184

Learning Module 7

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
Yield and Yield Spread Measures for Fixed-Rate Bonds

2.25
вҖӢ(1 + 0.00899 + Z)вҖӢ вҖӢ

2.25
вҖӢ(1 + 0.01260 + Z)вҖӢ вҖӢ

102.25
вҖӢ(1 + 0.01904 + Z)вҖӢ вҖӢ

	вҖӢ98.70 = ______________
вҖӢвҖҜвҖҜ1 вҖӢ+ ______________
вҖӢвҖҜвҖҜ2 вҖӢ+ ______________
вҖӢвҖҜвҖҜ3 вҖӢ.вҖӢ
The Solver add-in for Microsoft Excel finds Z = 0.0082, or 82 bps, by setting the
price (sum of present values of cash flows) equal to 98.70 as the objective and Z
as the change variable. Please refer to the candidate learning ecosystem online
for a spreadsheet demonstrating the calculation in the downloadable Excel
workbook.
A is incorrect because 80 bps is the value of the G-spread, not the Z-spread. The
G-spread is calculated as the difference between the QWE bond yield and the
yield of the government bond with the same maturity:
G-spread = 2.707% вҖ“ 1.904% = 80 bps.
C is incorrect because 87 bps is the I-spread, not the Z-spread. The I-spread is
calculated as a yield spread of a bond over the standard swap rate in the same
currency and with the same tenor. The yield-to-maturity for the corporate bond
is 2.707%, and the swap rate for the same maturity is 1.840%.
I-spread = 2.707% вҖ“ 1.840% = 87 bps.

5. The correct yield values matched with the corresponding yield measures are
presented in the following table:
Yield

Yield Measure

3.1497%

Yield-to-first call

2.9253%

Yield-to-second call

2.6998%

Yield-to-maturity

2.6998%

Yield-to-worst

Calculation of yield-to-first call:
вҖӢ(1 + r)вҖӢ вҖӢ

вҖӢ(1 + r)вҖӢ вҖӢ

PMT + CallPrice
вҖӢ(1 + r)вҖӢ вҖӢ

1.25
вҖӢ(1 + r)вҖӢ вҖӢ

1.25
вҖӢ(1 + r)вҖӢ вҖӢ

1.25
вҖӢ(1 + r)вҖӢ вҖӢ

вҖӢ PMT 2 вҖӢ+ ... + ____________
вҖӢвҖҜвҖҜ
вҖӢ.вҖӢ
	вҖӢPV = _
вҖӢ PMT 1 вҖӢ+ _
N
1.25 + 101.50
вҖӢ(1 + r)вҖӢ вҖӢ

_ _
	вҖӢPV = вҖӢ_1 вҖӢ+ _
вҖӢ
вҖӢ.вҖӢ
7 вҖӢ+ вҖӢ
2 вҖӢ+ ... + вҖӢ
8

	вҖӢr = 0.1548 Г— 2 = 0.031497.вҖӢ
Calculation of yield-to-second call:
вҖӢ(1 + r)вҖӢ вҖӢ

вҖӢ(1 + r)вҖӢ вҖӢ

PMT + CallPrice
вҖӢ(1 + r)вҖӢ вҖӢ

1.25
вҖӢ(1 + r)вҖӢ вҖӢ

1.25
вҖӢ(1 + r)вҖӢ вҖӢ

1.25
вҖӢ(1 + r)вҖӢ вҖӢ

	вҖӢPV = _
вҖӢ PMT 1 вҖӢ+ _
вҖӢ PMT 2 вҖӢ+ ... + ____________
вҖӢвҖҜвҖҜ
вҖӢ.вҖӢ
N
1.25 + 101.0
вҖӢ(1 + r)вҖӢ вҖӢ

_ _
	вҖӢPV = вҖӢ_1 вҖӢ+ _
вҖӢ
2 вҖӢ+ ... + вҖӢ
9 вҖӢ+ вҖӢ
10 вҖӢ.вҖӢ

	вҖӢr = 0.14626 Г— 2 = 0.029253.вҖӢ
Calculation of yield-to-maturity:
вҖӢ(1 + r)вҖӢ вҖӢ

вҖӢ(1 + r)вҖӢ вҖӢ

PMT + FV
вҖӢ(1 + r)вҖӢ вҖӢ

1.25
вҖӢ(1 + r)вҖӢ вҖӢ

1.25
вҖӢ(1 + r)вҖӢ вҖӢ

1.25
вҖӢ(1 + r)вҖӢ вҖӢ

PMT
PMT
_
_
	вҖӢPV = вҖӢ_
N вҖӢ.вҖӢ
1 вҖӢ+ вҖӢ
2 вҖӢ+ ... + вҖӢ
1.25 + 100.0
вҖӢ(1 + r)вҖӢ вҖӢ

_
_ _
	вҖӢPV = _
вҖӢ
1 вҖӢ+ вҖӢ
2 вҖӢ+ ... + вҖӢ
11 вҖӢ+ вҖӢ
12 вҖӢ.вҖӢ

	вҖӢr = 0.13499 Г— 2 = 0.026998.вҖӢ

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.

LEARNING MODULE

8

Yield and Yield Spread Measures
for Floating-Rate Instruments
LEARNING OUTCOMES
Mastery

The candidate should be able to:
calculate and interpret yield spread measures for floating-rate
instruments
calculate and interpret yield measures for money market instruments

INTRODUCTION
Prior lessons covered pricing, yields, and spreads for bonds with fixed coupon rates and
times-to-maturity of one year or longer. The next two lessons broaden the discussion
to include instruments with variable rather than fixed coupons, known as floating-rate
instruments, and those with original maturities of one year or less, known as money
market instruments. Both types of instrument are important for investors and issuers.
Floating-rate instruments, by adjusting cash flows to changes in interest rates, bear
less price risk than fixed-rate instruments and are used to hedge certain exposures
and to match asset and liability cash flows. Most loans are floating-rate instruments.
Money market instruments are a significant source of short-term financing for many
types of issuers. A short time-to-maturity means that investors can reinvest and issuers
can refinance relatively quickly, which reduces interest rate risk.
Most of the examples and exhibits used throughout the reading can be downloaded
as a Microsoft Excel workbook. Each worksheet in the workbook is labeled with the
corresponding example or exhibit number in the text.
LEARNING MODULE OVERVIEW
в– 

A floating-rate instrument is a debt instrument with interest
determined by an observed market reference rate (MRR) plus
a quoted margin. Interest payments are reset, capturing any change in
the MRR, on predetermined dates.

в– 

The quoted margin is a specified spread over or under the reference
rate. The required margin, also known as the discount margin, is the
spread required by investors.

1

186

Learning Module 8

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
Yield and Yield Spread Measures for Floating-Rate Instruments

в– 

The required margin reflects вҖңbottom-upвҖқ or issuer- and security-specific risks and is analogous to a yield spread for a fixed-rate bond
discussed in prior lessons. If a floater trades at par, the quoted and
required margins are equal.

в– 

Money market instruments have original maturities of one year or less
and are quoted using different conventions from those of longer-dated
securities. Quotes are made on a discount rate or add-on rate basis.

в– 

Money market discount rates are interest income divided by the face
value (maturity value). They understate the investorвҖҷs rate of return if
the purchase price is below the face value and vice versa.

в– 

Conventional money market measures can be converted to enhance
comparability to longer-term securities.

LEARNING MODULE SELF-ASSESSMENT
These initial questions are intended to help you gauge your current level
of understanding of the learning module.
1. The following information relates to three floating-rate notes (FRNs) issued
at par value that have the three-month MRR as their reference rate.
вҖӢ

Floating-Rate Note

Quoted Margin

Discount Margin

FRN 1

140 bps

128 bps

FRN 2

145 bps

145 bps

FRN 3

150 bps

165 bps

вҖӢ

Based on the information provided, identify which FRN will be priced at a
discount on the next reset date.
A. FRN 1
B. FRN 2
C. FRN 3
Solution:
C is correct. FRN 3 will be priced at a discount on the next reset date since
its quoted margin of 150 bps is less than its discount margin of 165 bps. The
discount amount is the present value of the deficient future interest payments of 15 bps per quarter (150 bps вҖ“ 165 bps).
B is incorrect because FRN 2 will be priced at par value on the next reset
date since its quoted margin is equal to its discount margin.
A is incorrect because FRN 1 will be priced at a premium because its quoted
margin of 140 bps is greater than its discount margin of 128 bps. The premium amount is the present value of the extra, or вҖңexcess,вҖқ interest payments of
12 bps each quarter (140 bps вҖ“ 128 bps).
2. On a reset date, if the required margin falls to 30 bps because of a change
in the issuerвҖҷs credit risk, an FRN that has a quoted margin of 50 bps will be
priced at a:
A. discount.
B. premium.

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.

Introduction

C. discount or premium, depending on its duration.
Solution:
B is correct. The required margin reflects the credit risk of the issuer. It declined, meaning that the credit risk of the issuer improved; in other words,
the market demands a lower spread. The required margin is below the quoted margin, so this floater will be priced at a premium.
3. A 365-day year bank certificate of deposit has an initial principal amount of
USD96.5 million and a redemption amount due at maturity of USD100 million. The number of days between settlement and maturity is 270. The addon rate of the certificate of deposit is closest to:
A. 3.63%.
B. 4.82%.
C. 4.90%.
Solution:
C is correct. The add-on rate is closest to 4.90%. The add-on rate is calculated as
FV вҲ’ PV

вҖӢГ— _
вҖӢ PV вҖӢ.
AOR = _
вҖӢ
Days
Year

вҖӢ
100 вҲ’
96.5 вҖӢ
365
_
вҖӢAOR
вҖӢ	вҖӢ
вҖҜвҖҜвҖҜ
вҖҜвҖҜ
= _
вҖӢ
270 вҖӢГ— вҖӢ 96.5 вҖӢ.

вҖӢ

вҖӢ
AOR = 0.04903 = 4.90 % .
4. A 90-day commercial paper instrument is quoted at a discount rate of
0.120%, assuming a 360-day year. Given that the price of the instrument is
paid 100 per face value, its bond equivalent yield rate is closest to:
A. 0.107%.
B. 0.120%.
C. 0.135%.
Solution:
B is correct. The bond equivalent yield is closest to 0.120%. First, we need to
calculate the price of the instrument. Then, we can calculate the AOR or its
bond equivalent yield.
The price (PV) of the commercial paper instrument is
Days

PV = FV Г— (1 вҲ’ _
вҖӢYear вҖӢГ— DR ) .

вҖӢ
90
	вҖӢвҖҜвҖҜвҖҜ
вҖӢPV
вҖҜвҖҜвҖҜ
= 100 Г— (1 вҲ’ _
вҖӢ360 вҖӢГ— 0.0012вҖӢ ) .вҖӢ

вҖӢ
PV = 99.97.

PV is used to calculate the add-on rate or bond equivalent yield:
FV вҲ’ PV

вҖӢГ— _
вҖӢ PV вҖӢ.
AOR = _
вҖӢ
Days
Year

вҖӢ
100 вҲ’
99.97вҖӢ вҖӢ вҖӢ
360
_
вҖӢAOR
вҖӢ	вҖӢ
вҖҜвҖҜвҖҜ
вҖҜвҖҜ
= _
вҖӢ
90 вҖӢГ— вҖӢ 99.97 .вҖӢ

вҖӢ
AOR = 0.0012 = 0.12 % .

187

188

Learning Module 8

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
Yield and Yield Spread Measures for Floating-Rate Instruments

5. A fixed-income analyst is evaluating two instruments:
в– 

A 180-day Thai bank certificate of deposit (CD) quoted at a discount
rate of 5.95%, assuming a 360-day year and a bond equivalent yield of
6.218%

в– 

A 180-day Thai corporate commercial paper (CP) quoted as an add-on
rate of 6.10%, assuming a 365-day year and a bond equivalent yield of
6.100%.

Assuming the six-month Thai T-bill is quoted at 4.36%, which instrument
most likely has higher credit risk?
Solution:

The Thai CD. The spreads over the Thai T-bill for the CD and CP are 186
bps and 174 bps, respectively. We use the bond equivalent yield measure to
compare the return of each instrument and derive the spread of each one
over the Thai T-bill.
The Thai bank CD has a spread of
6.218% вҖ“ 4.36% = 186 bps.
And the Thai corporate CP has a spread of
6.10% вҖ“ 4.36% = 174 bps.
Therefore, the Thai bank CD has a higher credit risk than the Thai corporate
CP.

2

YIELD AND YIELD SPREAD MEASURES FOR
FLOATING-RATE NOTES
calculate and interpret yield spread measures for floating-rate
instruments

Yield and Yield Spread Measures for Floating-Rate Instruments
Floating-rate instruments, including floating-rate notes (FRNs or floaters) and most
loans, are different from fixed-rate bonds. Rather than fixed coupon payments, they
vary from period to period depending on the current level of a reference interest rate.
The intent is to both automatically adjust a borrowerвҖҷs base rate to market conditions
and offer an investor or lender less price risk when market interest rates fluctuate. In
principle, a floater has a stable price even in a period of volatile interest rates because
cash flows adjust with changes in interest rates. With a traditional fixed-income security,
constant future cash flows result in price changes in response to interest rate volatility.
Exhibit 1 shows the term sheet for four-year FRNs issued by Antelas AG, the
German emerging technology company focused on manufacturing process design,
introduced in an earlier lesson.

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
Yield and Yield Spread Measures for Floating-Rate Notes

Exhibit 1: Antelas AG Floating-Rate Note Issue
Antelas AG Four-Year Floating-Rate Notes (the вҖңNotesвҖқ)
Prospectus Summary
Issuer:

Settlement Date:
Maturity Date:

Principal Amount:

Antelas AG
[T + 5 Business Days]
[Four Years from Settlement Date]
EUR250 million

Interest:
Interest Payment:

MRR plus 250 bps p.a.
MRR is reset quarterly and interest is paid quarterly
Commencing three months from [Settlement Date] to be paid
quarterly with final payment on [Maturity Date]

Seniority:

The Notes are secured and unsubordinated obligations of Antelas
AG and will rank pari passu with all other secured and unsubordinated indebtedness

Business Days:

Frankfurt

Notice how the interest is stated вҖңMRR plus 250 bps p.a.вҖқ The market reference rate
(MRR) on an FRN or loan usually is a short-term money market rate. Typically, the
reference rate is determined at the beginning of the period, and the interest payment
is made at the end of the period. This payment structure is called вҖңin arrears.вҖқ The
most common day-count conventions for calculating accrued interest on floaters
are actual/360 and actual/365. For the Antelas FRN, the MRR is reset quarterly and
interest is paid quarterly.
For most FRNs and loans, a specified spread is added to or subtracted from the
market reference rate. For the Antelas FRN, the spread over the MRR is 250 bps, and
this is known as the quoted margin on the FRN. The role of the quoted margin is
to compensate the investor for the difference in the credit risk of the issuer and that
implied by the reference rate. Firms with very low credit risk may be able to obtain
a negative quoted margin.
The required margin is the yield spread over or under the reference rate such that
the FRN is priced at par value on a rate reset date. It is determined by the market.
Suppose that a floater is issued at par value and pays MRR plus 0.50%. The quoted
margin is 50 bps. If there is no change in the credit risk of the issuer, the required
margin remains at 50 bps. On each quarterly reset date, the floater will be priced at
par value. Between coupon dates, its flat price will be at a premium or discount to
par value if MRR goes, respectively, down or up. However, if the required margin
continues to be the same as the quoted margin, the flat price is вҖңpulled to parвҖқ as the
next reset date nears. At the reset date, any change in MRR is included in the interest
payment for the next period.
Changes in the required margin usually come from changes in the issuerвҖҷs credit
risk. Changes in liquidity or tax status can also affect the required margin. Note that
these are the same factors that affect the yield spread for fixed-rate bonds. Suppose
that on a reset date, the required margin increases to 75 bps because of a downgrade
in the issuerвҖҷs credit rating. If the quoted margin is 50 bps, the issuer now pays its
investors a вҖңdeficientвҖқ interest payment. This FRN will be priced at a discount below
par value. The amount of the discount is the present value of the deficient future cash
flows. That annuity is 25 bps per period for the remaining life of the bond. It is the
difference between the required and quoted margins. If the required margin instead
fell to 40 bps, perhaps from a decrease in the issuerвҖҷs credit risk, the FRN would be
priced at a premium. The amount of the premium is the present value of the 10 bp
annuity for the вҖңexcessвҖқ interest payment each period.

189

190

Learning Module 8

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
Yield and Yield Spread Measures for Floating-Rate Instruments

Fixed-rate and floating-rate bonds are essentially the same with respect to changes
in credit risk. With fixed-rate bonds, the premium or discount arises from a difference
in the fixed coupon rate and the required yield-to-maturity. With floating-rate bonds,
the premium or discount arises from a difference in the fixed quoted margin and the
required margin. However, fixed-rate and floating-rate bonds are very different with
respect to changes in benchmark interest rates.
The valuation of a floating-rate note requires a pricing model. Recall that the price
for a fixed-rate bond given a market discount rate r and a coupon per period PMT is
PMT + FV
вҖӢ(1 + r)вҖӢ вҖӢ

PMT
PMT
_
_
	вҖӢPV = вҖӢ_
N вҖӢ.вҖӢ
1 вҖӢ+ вҖӢ
2 вҖӢ+ ... + вҖӢ
вҖӢ(1 + r)вҖӢ вҖӢ

вҖӢ(1 + r)вҖӢ вҖӢ

For an FRN, PMT is a function of the MRR and the quoted margin and r is a function
of the MRR and the discount margin. We can use this intuition to derive Equation 1,
a simplified FRN pricing model.
______________
вҖӢвҖҜвҖҜ
вҖӢ
m

(MRR + QM ) Г— FV

______________
вҖӢвҖҜвҖҜ
вҖӢ
m

(MRR + QM ) Г— FV

______________
вҖӢвҖҜвҖҜ
вҖӢ+ FV
m

(MRR + QM ) Г— FV

+ DM
_
вҖӢ(1 + вҖӢMRR
вҖӢ)вҖӢ вҖӢ
m

+ DM
_
вҖӢ(1 + вҖӢMRR
вҖӢ)вҖӢ вҖӢ
m

+ DM
_
вҖӢ(1 + вҖӢMRR
вҖӢ)вҖӢ вҖӢ
m

	вҖӢPV = ____________
вҖӢвҖҜвҖҜ1 вҖӢ+ ____________
вҖӢвҖҜвҖҜ2 вҖӢ+ ... + ________________
вҖӢвҖҜвҖҜ
вҖҜвҖҜ
N вҖӢ,вҖӢ	

(1)

where
PV = present value, or the price of the floating-rate note
MRR = the market reference rate, stated as an annual percentage rate (it is sometimes known generically as Index)
QM = the quoted margin, stated as an annual percentage rate
FV = the future value paid at maturity, or the par value of the bond
m = the periodicity of the floating-rate note, the number of payment periods
per year
DM = the discount margin = required margin stated as an annual percentage rate
N = the number of evenly spaced periods to maturity
Notice that in Equation 1, because we are using annual rates for MRR, QM, and
DM, we must divide by m periods in the year.
This is a simplified model for several reasons. First, PV is as of a rate reset date
when there are N evenly spaced periods to maturity. There is no accrued interest, so the
flat price is the full price. Second, the model assumes a 30/360 day-count convention,
to make sure the periodicity, m, is an integer. However, in practice, most floaters use
actual/360 day counts. Third, and most important, the same MRR is used for all cash
flows. More complex FRN pricing models use projected future rates in the numerators
and spot rates in the denominators. Therefore, the calculation for DM depends on the
simplifying assumptions in the pricing model.
Suppose that we are pricing a two-year, semi-annual FRN that pays MRR plus
0.50%. Assume MRR is 1.25% and the yield spread required by investors is 40 bps.
For Equation 1, we have the following inputs:
MRR = 0.0125,
QM = 0.0050,
FV = 100,
m = 2,
DM = 0.0040, and
N = 4.

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
Yield and Yield Spread Measures for Floating-Rate Notes

Using Equation 1 for N = 4, the FRN is priced at 100.196 per 100 of par value. This
floater is priced at a premium above par value because the quoted margin is greater
than the discount margin.
______________
вҖӢвҖҜвҖҜ
вҖӢ
m

(MRR + QM ) Г— FV

______________
вҖӢвҖҜвҖҜ
вҖӢ
m

(MRR + QM ) Г— FV

______________
вҖӢвҖҜвҖҜ
вҖӢ+ FV
m

(MRR + QM ) Г— FV

+ DM
_
вҖӢ(1 + вҖӢMRR
вҖӢ)вҖӢ вҖӢ
m

+ DM
_
вҖӢ(1 + вҖӢMRR
вҖӢ)вҖӢ вҖӢ
m

+ DM
_
вҖӢ(1 + вҖӢMRR
вҖӢ)вҖӢ вҖӢ
m

	вҖӢPV = ____________
вҖӢвҖҜвҖҜ1 вҖӢ+ ____________
вҖӢвҖҜвҖҜ2 вҖӢ+ ... + ________________
вҖӢвҖҜвҖҜ
вҖҜвҖҜ
N вҖӢ.вҖӢ
(0.0125 + 0.0050 ) Г— 100
(0.0125 + 0.0050 ) Г— 100
(0.0125 + 0.0050 ) Г— 100
(0.0125 + 0.0050 ) Г— 100
вҖӢ_________________
вҖҜвҖҜ вҖӢ _________________
вҖӢвҖҜвҖҜ вҖӢ _________________
вҖӢвҖҜвҖҜ вҖӢ _________________
вҖӢвҖҜвҖҜ вҖӢ+ 100

2
2
2
2
_______________
_______________
____________________
вҖҜвҖҜ
вҖҜвҖҜ
вҖҜвҖҜ
вҖҜвҖҜ
вҖҜвҖҜ
вҖҜвҖҜ
вҖҜвҖҜ
вҖӢ
вҖӢPV = _______________
вҖӢвҖҜвҖҜ
1 вҖӢ+ вҖӢ
2 вҖӢ+ вҖӢ
3 вҖӢ+ вҖӢ
4
0.0125 + 0.040

вҖӢ(1 + ___________
вҖӢвҖҜвҖҜ
вҖӢ)вҖӢ вҖӢ
2

0.0125 + 0.040

вҖӢ(1 + ___________
вҖӢвҖҜвҖҜ
вҖӢ)вҖӢ вҖӢ
2

0.0125 + 0.040

вҖӢ(1 + ___________
вҖӢвҖҜвҖҜ
вҖӢ)вҖӢ вҖӢ
2

0.0125 + 0.040

вҖӢ(1 + ___________
вҖӢвҖҜвҖҜ
вҖӢ)вҖӢ вҖӢ
2

PV = 100.196
If we have the market price of an FRN, we can also use Equation 1 to estimate the
discount margin. Suppose that a two-year FRN pays MRR plus 0.75% on a semiannual
basis. Currently, MRR is 1.10% and the price of the floater is 95.50 per 100 of par
value, a discount to par, because of worsening credit risk. For Equation 1, we have
the following inputs:
PV = 95.50,
MRR = 0.0110,
QM = 0.0075,
FV = 100,
m = 2, and
N = 4.
Using the Solver add-in for Microsoft Excel, we find DM = 3.12%, or 312 bps, by
setting the price (sum of present values of cash flows) equal to 95.50 as the objective
and DM as the change variable. Please see the candidate learning ecosystem online
for a spreadsheet demonstrating the calculation in the downloadable Excel workbook.
If this FRN was issued at par value, investors required at that time a spread of only
75 bps over MRR. Now, after the credit downgrade, investors require an estimated
discount margin of 312 bps. The floater trades at a discount because the quoted margin
remains fixed at 75 bps, so is вҖңdeficientвҖқ by 237 bps (312-75) per period The discount
margin is an estimate because it is based on a simplified FRN pricing model.
The FRN pricing model in Equation 1 similarly applies to adjustable-rate loans
made by banks and other fixed-income instruments based on MRR. Because a significant portion of bank funding comes from short-term deposits and other floating-rate
sources, banks prefer to make floating-rate loans to businesses and individuals, as
opposed to fixed-rate loans, to help maintain a match between assets and liabilities
on the balance sheet.
EXAMPLE 1

Calculating the Discount Margin for a Floating-Rate Note
Suppose that the MRR for the Antelas AG four-year floating-rate note is on a
three-month basis and the quoted margin is 250 bps. The floater is priced at 97
per 100 of par value. Calculate the discount margin for the floater assuming that
three-month MRR is constant at вҖ“0.55%. Assume a 30/360 day-count convention
and evenly spaced periods.
Solution:

191

192

Learning Module 8

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
Yield and Yield Spread Measures for Floating-Rate Instruments

We can use the Solver add-in in Microsoft Excel to quickly solve for DM
= 3.29%, or 329 bps, in the same manner as in the prior example. Please see
the candidate learning ecosystem online for a spreadsheet demonstrating the
calculation in the downloadable Excel workbook.
Alternatively, we can use the RATE function in Microsoft Excel, Google
Sheets, or a financial calculator by first solving for PMT, the numerators in
Equation 1.
(MRR + QM ) Г— FV

вҖӢ.вҖӢ
	вҖӢPMT = ______________
вҖӢвҖҜвҖҜ
m
(вҲ’ 0.0055 + 0.0250 ) Г— 100

вҖӢ.вҖӢ
	вҖӢPMT = ___________________
вҖӢвҖҜвҖҜ
4
	вҖӢPMT = 0.4875.вҖӢ
Then, using PV = вҖ“97, FV = 100, PMT = 0.4875, and N = 16, we can solve
for the discount rate per period of 0.686122%. We use this to solve for DM.
+ DM
_
вҖӢ.вҖӢ
	вҖӢr = вҖӢMRR
m
вҲ’ 0.0055 + DM

вҖӢ.вҖӢ
	вҖӢ0.00686122 = ___________
вҖӢвҖҜвҖҜ
4
	вҖӢDM = 0.0329 = 3.29 % .вҖӢ
The quoted margin is 250 bps over the reference rate. Using the simplified
FRN pricing model, the discount margin (the spread investors require for the
floater to be priced at par) is 329 bps.
QUESTION SET
1. Fill in the blanks using one of the words in each set of parentheses:
Floaters with longer reset periods may be __________ (more, less) exposed
to interest rate and price volatility.
The __________ (shorter, longer) the reset period, the more a floater will behave similarly to a short-dated fixed-rate security and the __________ (less,
more) its price will potentially fluctuate.
Solution:

Floaters with longer reset periods may be more exposed to interest rate and
price volatility. The longer the reset period, the more a floater will behave
similarly to a short-dated fixed-rate security and the more its price will
potentially fluctuate.
2. For a five-year floating-rate security, if market interest rates change by 0.5%,
the change in the price of the security will most likely be:
A. zero.
B. like an otherwise identical fixed-rate security.
C. related to the securityвҖҷs coupon reset frequency.
Solution:
C is correct. The interest rate sensitivity of a floating-rate security comes
typically from the time remaining until its next coupon reset date.

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
Yield and Yield Spread Measures for Floating-Rate Notes

A is incorrect: when the interest rates changes, the discount rate of the
floating rate security also changes, changing the present value of the security
when discounting the cashflows.
B is incorrect: with a fixed-rate security, interest rates changes affect the
price more than an identical (same-term) floating-rate security, due to its
fixed coupon payments and a higher duration.
3. Identify the relationship between required margin and a floaterвҖҷs price at the
reset date:
вҖӢ

1. Required margin > Quoted
margin

A. Floater priced at par

2. Required margin = Quoted
margin

B. Floater priced at a discount

3. Required margin < Quoted
margin

C. Floater priced at a premium
вҖӢ

Solution:
вҖӢ

1. Required margin > Quoted
margin

B. Floater priced at a discount

2. Required margin = Quoted
margin

A. Floater priced at par

3. Required margin < Quoted
margin

C. Floater priced at a premium
вҖӢ

For Required margin > Quoted margin, B is correct. Changes in the required
margin usually come from changes in the issuerвҖҷs credit risk. If the required
margin increases and is above the quoted margin at the reset date, the floater pays a вҖңdeficientвҖқ interest payment. The floater will be priced at a discount
below par value.
For Required margin = Quoted margin, A is correct. If the required margin
continues to be the same as the quoted margin, the flat price is вҖңpulled to
parвҖқ as the next reset date nears.
For Required margin < Quoted margin, C is correct. If the required margin
decreases and is below the quoted margin, the floater will be priced at a
premium.
4. A two-year Italian floating-rate note pays three-month Euribor of вҖ“0.50%
plus 250 bp. The floater is priced at 99 per 100 of par value. Assuming the
30/360 day-count convention and evenly spaced periods, the discount margin for the floater is closest to:
A. 201 bps.
B. 251 bps.
C. 300 bps.
Solution:
C is correct. The discount margin for the floater is closest to 300 bps. Using
the information provided, the periodic PMT is equal to
(MRR + QM ) Г— FV
(вҲ’ 0.005 + 0.0025 ) Г— 100
______________
вҖӢ = __________________
вҖӢвҖҜвҖҜ
вҖӢ = 0.5.вҖӢ
	вҖӢвҖҜвҖҜ
m
4

Using the RATE function in Microsoft Excel, Google Sheets, or a financial
calculator using PV = вҖ“99, FV = 100, PMT = 0.5, and N = 8, we solve for the

193

194

Learning Module 8

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
Yield and Yield Spread Measures for Floating-Rate Instruments

discount rate per period of 0.628562%. The discount margin can be estimated by solving for DM:
+ DM
_
вҖӢ.вҖӢ
	вҖӢr = вҖӢMRR
m
вҲ’ 0.005 + DM

вҖӢ.вҖӢ
	вҖӢ0.00628562 = _
вҖӢ
4
	вҖӢDM = 0.03014 = 3.014 % .вҖӢ
5. The Antelas AG four-year floating-rate note pays three-month MRR of
вҖ“0.55% plus 250 bps. The floater is priced at 102 per 100 of par value.
Assuming the 30/360 day-count convention and evenly spaced periods,
calculate the discount margin for the floating-rate note.
Solution:

The estimated discount margin is 199 bps.
Using the information provided, the periodic PMT is equal to
(MRR + QM ) Г— FV

(вҲ’ 0.0055 + 0.025 ) Г— 100

______________
	вҖӢвҖҜвҖҜ
вҖӢ = __________________
вҖӢвҖҜвҖҜ
вҖӢ = 0.4875.вҖӢ
m
4

Using the RATE function in Microsoft Excel, Google Sheets, or a financial
calculator using PV = вҖ“102, FV = 100, PMT = 0.4875, and N = 16, we solve
for the discount rate per period of 0.358655%. The discount margin can then
be estimated by solving for DM:
+ DM
_
вҖӢ.вҖӢ
	вҖӢr = вҖӢMRR
m
вҲ’ 0.0055 + DM

вҖӢ.вҖӢ
	вҖӢ0.00358655 = ___________
вҖӢвҖҜвҖҜ
4
	вҖӢDM = 0.019846 = 1.99 % .вҖӢ

3

YIELD MEASURES FOR MONEY MARKET
INSTRUMENTS
calculate and interpret yield measures for money market instruments
Money market instruments are debt securities with original maturities of one year
or less. There are many types, including overnight sale and repurchase agreements
(repos), bank certificates of deposit, commercial paper, Treasury bills (government
securities issued with a maturity of one year or less), bankersвҖҷ acceptances, and time
deposits based on market reference rates. There are mutual funds that invest solely
in eligible money market securities, known as money market mutual funds, which
are sometimes considered as an alternative to bank deposits.
There are several important differences in yield measures quoted for money market
instruments versus bonds:
1. Bond yields-to-maturity are annualized and compounded. Yield measures
in the money market are annualized but not compounded; the return on a
money market instrument is stated on a simple interest basis.

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
Yield Measures for Money Market Instruments

2. Bond yields-to-maturity usually are stated for a common periodicity for all
times-to-maturity. Money market instruments with different times-to-maturity have different periodicities for the annual rate.
3. Bond yields-to-maturity can be calculated using standard time-valueof-money analysis. Money market instruments are often quoted using
non-standard interest rates and require different pricing equations than
those used for bonds.
In general, quoted money market rates are either discount rates or add-on rates.
Although market conventions vary around the world, commercial paper, Treasury
bills, and bankersвҖҷ acceptances often are quoted on a discount rate basis. Bank certificates of deposit, repos, and market reference rate indexes are quoted on an add-on
rate basis. While discount rate usually means вҖңinterest rate used to calculate a present value,вҖқ in the money market, the discount rate involves an instrument for which
interest is included in the face value of the instrument. An add-on rate, in contrast,
involves interest that is added to the principal or investment amount. Some examples
will clarify this point.
Equation 2 is the pricing formula for money market instruments quoted on a
discount rate basis.
Days

	вҖӢPV = FV Г— (1 вҲ’ _
вҖӢYear вҖӢГ— DR ) ,вҖӢ	

(2)

where
PV = present value, or the price of the money market instrument
FV = the future value paid at maturity, or the face value of the money market
instrument
Days = the number of days between settlement and maturity
Year = the number of days in the year
DR = the discount rate, stated as an annual percentage rate
Suppose that a 91-day Indian Treasury bill (T-bill) with a face value of INR10
million is quoted at a discount rate of 3.45% for an assumed 360-day year. The price
of the Indian rupee T-bill is INR9,912,792.
Days

	вҖӢPV = FV Г— (1 вҲ’ _
вҖӢYear вҖӢГ— DR ) .вҖӢ
91

	вҖӢPV = 10, 000, 000 Г— (1 вҲ’ _
вҖӢ360 вҖӢГ— 0.0345 ) .вҖӢ
	вҖӢPV = 9, 912, 791.67.вҖӢ
The unique characteristics of a money market discount rate can be examined with
Equation 3, which transforms Equation 2 algebraically to isolate the DR term.
Year

(FV вҲ’ PV)

вҖӢ FV вҖӢ.вҖӢ	
	вҖӢDR = _
вҖӢDays вҖӢГ— _

(3)

The first term, Year/Days, is the periodicity of the annual rate. The second term reveals
the odd character of a money market discount rate. The numerator, FV вҖ“ PV, is the
interest earned on the rupee T-bill, INR87,208 (= 10,000,000 вҖ“ 9,912,792), over the 91
days to maturity. However, the denominator is FV, not PV. In theory, an interest rate
is the amount earned divided by the investment amount (PV), not the maturity value
(FV), which includes the earnings. Therefore, by design, a money market discount rate
understates the rate of return to the investor, and it understates the cost of borrowed
funds to the issuer. That is because PV is less than FV if DR is greater than zero.

195

196

Learning Module 8

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
Yield and Yield Spread Measures for Floating-Rate Instruments

Equation 4 is the pricing formula for money market instruments quoted on an
add-on rate basis.
	вҖӢPV = _____________
вҖӢвҖҜвҖҜ
,вҖӢвҖӢ	
Days
_
FV

(4)

(1 + вҖӢYear вҖӢГ— AOR)

where
PV = present value, the principal amount, or the price of the money market
instrument
FV = the future value, or the redemption amount paid at maturity including
interest
Days = the number of days between settlement and maturity
Year = the number of days in the year
AOR = the add-on rate, stated as an annual percentage rate
EXAMPLE 2

Yield Measures on Bank Certificates of Deposit
Commercial Finance Partners AG (CFP Bank) issues 90-day certificates of
deposit (CDs) to fund its floating-rate loans made to customers. The objective
is to maintain a match between the bankвҖҷs assets (floating-rate loans) and its
funding sources. The quoted add-on rate for its 90-day CD is 0.12%, assuming
a 365-day year. If the initial principal amount is EUR20 million, the redemption
amount due at maturity is found by rearranging Equation 4 and entering PV =
20,000,000, Days = 90, Year = 365, and AOR = 0.0012.
90

	вҖӢFV = 20, 000, 000 + (20, 000, 000 Г— _
вҖӢ365 вҖӢГ— 0.0012 ) .вҖӢ
	вҖӢFV = 20,005,918.вҖӢ
At maturity, CFP Bank pays EUR20,005,918, the principal of EUR20,000,000
plus interest of EUR5,918. The interest is calculated as the principal times the
fraction of the year times the annual add-on rate. It is added to the principal to
determine the redemption amount.
Suppose that after 45 days, the CD investor sells the CD to a dealer. At that
time, the quoted add-on rate for a 45-day CD is 0.06%. The sale price for the
CD can be calculated using Equation 4 for FV = 20,004,918, Days = 45, Year =
365, and AOR = 0.0012. The sale price is EUR20,002,958.

20, 004, 918

вҖҜвҖҜ
вҖӢ.вҖӢ
	вҖӢPV = _____________
вҖӢвҖҜвҖҜ
45
_
(1 + вҖӢ365 вҖӢГ— 0.0006)

	вҖӢPV = 20, 003, 438.вҖӢ
The characteristics of an add-on rate can be examined with Equation 5, which
transforms Equation 4 algebraically to isolate the AOR term.
Year

FV вҲ’ PV

	вҖӢAOR = _
вҖӢDays вҖӢГ— _
вҖӢ PV вҖӢ.вҖӢ	

(5)

The first term, Year/Days, is the periodicity of the annual rate. The second
term is the interest earned (FV вҖ“ PV) divided by the amount invested (PV).

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
Yield Measures for Money Market Instruments

CFP BankвҖҷs rate of return on its 45-day investment in the certificates of
deposit can be calculated with Equation 5.
Year

FV вҲ’ PV

365

20, 002, 958 вҲ’ 20, 000, 000

	вҖӢAOR = _
вҖӢDays вҖӢГ— _
вҖӢ PV .вҖӢвҖӢ
___________________
вҖҜвҖҜ
вҖӢ.вҖӢ
	вҖӢAOR = вҖӢ_
45 вҖӢГ— вҖӢвҖҜвҖҜ
20,
000, 000

	вҖӢAOR = 0.0012.вҖӢ
The rate of return, stated on a 365-day add-on rate basis, is 0.12%. This result
is an annual rate for a periodicity of 8.11 (= 365/45). Implicitly, this assumes
that the investment can be replicated 8.11 times over the year.
Investment analysis is more challenging for money market securities because (1)
some instruments are quoted on a discount rate basis while others on an add-on rate
basis and (2) some assume a 360-day year and others use a 365-day year. Another
difference is that the вҖңamountвҖқ of a money market instrument quoted by traders on a
discount rate basis typically is the face value paid at maturity. However, the вҖңamountвҖқ
when quoted on an add-on rate basis usually is the price at issuance. Exhibit 2 summarizes these conventions.

Exhibit 2: Summary of Money Market Yield Measures
Conventions and
Instruments

Description

Quote Basis

Discount Rate (DR)

Add-on Rate (AOR)

Equation

DR = (Year/Days) Г— [(FV
вҖ“ PV)/FV].

AOR = (Year/Days) Г— [(FV вҖ“ PV)/
PV].

Quoted Amount

Face Value at Maturity (FV)

Price at Issuance (PV)

Typical Instruments

Commercial Paper, Treasury
Bills, BankersвҖҷ Acceptances

Bank Certificates of Deposit,
Repurchase Agreements (Repos),
Market Reference Rates (MRRs)

To make money market investment decisions, it is essential to compare instruments
on a common basis. The following example illustrates this point.
EXAMPLE 3

Yield Measures on Bank Certificates of Deposit
Suppose that an investor is comparing the following two money market instruments. Which offers the higher expected rate of return, assuming that credit
risks are the same?
в– 

A 90-day commercial paper (CP) issued by Bright Wheel Automotive
Corporation (BRWA), quoted at a discount rate of 0.100% for a 360day year

в– 

A 90-day certificate of deposit issued by CFP Bank, quoted at an
add-on rate of 0.120% for a 365-day year

The price of the commercial paper is 98.560 per 100 of face value, calculated
using Equation 2 and entering FV = 100, Days = 90, Year = 360, and DR = 0.0012.

197

198

Learning Module 8

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
Yield and Yield Spread Measures for Floating-Rate Instruments

Days

	вҖӢPV = FV Г— (1 вҲ’ _
вҖӢYear вҖӢГ— DR ) .вҖӢ
90

	вҖӢPV = 100 Г— (1 вҲ’ _
вҖӢ360 вҖӢГ— 0.0012 ) .вҖӢ
	вҖӢPV = 99.970.вҖӢ
Next, use Equation 5 to solve for AOR for a 365-day year, where Year = 365,
Days = 90, FV = 100, and PV = 99.970.
Year

FV вҲ’ PV

365

100 вҲ’ 99.970

	вҖӢAOR = _
вҖӢDays вҖӢГ— _
вҖӢ PV вҖӢ.вҖӢ
_
	вҖӢAOR = вҖӢ_
90 вҖӢГ— вҖӢ 99.970 вҖӢ.вҖӢ

	вҖӢAOR = 0.00122.вҖӢ
The 90-day commercial paper discount rate of 0.120% converts to an add-on
rate for a 365-day year of 0.122%. This converted rate is called a bond equivalent
yield, or sometimes just an вҖңinvestment yield.вҖқ A bond equivalent yield is a
money market rate stated on a 365-day add-on rate basis. If the risks are the
same, BRWAвҖҷs CP offers 0.2 bps more in annual return than CFP BankвҖҷs CD.
Exhibit 3 summarizes the process just illustrated for comparing money market
instruments on a common, bond equivalent yield basis.

Exhibit 3: Comparing Money Market Instruments on Bond Equivalent Yield
Basis
Step 1
Step 2
For a MM instrument
quoted on Discount Rate
(DR) Basis:
Determine Price per 100 of
Par (PV):
PV = FV x (1 вҖ“ [Days/Year] x DR)

Step 3
Deternine Add-on Rate
(AOR) for this MM
instrument using PV from
Step 1:
AOR = (365/Days) * ([FV вҖ“ PV]/PV)

Bond Equivalent Yield (BEY)
is a MM rate stated on a
365-day AOR basis.
This instrument is now
comprable with other MM
instruments expressed on
a BEY basis.

EXAMPLE 4

Comparing Money Market Instruments Based on Bond
Equivalent Yields
A money market investor observes quoted rates on four 180-day money market
instruments: A, B, C, and D.
вҖӢ

Quotation Basis

Assumed
Number of Days
in the Year

Quoted Rate

A

Discount Rate

360

4.33%

B

Discount Rate

365

4.36%

Money Market
Instrument

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
Yield Measures for Money Market Instruments

Quotation Basis

Assumed
Number of Days
in the Year

Quoted Rate

C

Add-On Rate

360

4.35%

D

Add-On Rate

365

4.45%

Money Market
Instrument

вҖӢ

Using a spreadsheet, we can calculate the bond equivalent yield for each
instrument so that rates of return can be compared. Bond A offers the highest
rate of return (4.487%) and Bond C offers the lowest rate of return (4.410%) on
a bond equivalent yield basis. Please refer to the candidate learning ecosystem
online for a spreadsheet demonstrating the calculation in the downloadable
Excel workbook.
вҖӢ

Money market
Instrument
Input

A

B

C

D

Quotation Basis

Discount
Rate

Discount
Rate

Add-On
Rate

Add-On Rate

Number of Days in
the Year

360

365

360

365

Quoted Rated (%)

4.33%

4.36%

4.35%

4.45%

PV/FV

97.835

97.850

102.175

102.195

Add-On-Rate

0.04487

0.04456

0.04410

0.04450

Bond Equivalent
Yield (%)

4.487%

4.456%

4.410%

4.450%

Output

вҖӢ

Another important difference between yield measures in the money market and
the bond market is the periodicity of the annual rate. Because bond yields-to-maturity
are computed using interest rate compounding, there is a well-defined periodicity. For
instance, bond yields-to-maturity for semiannual compounding are annualized for a
periodicity of two. Money market rates are computed using simple interest without
compounding. In the money market, the periodicity is the number of days in the year
divided by the number of days to maturity. Therefore, money market rates for different
times-to-maturity have different periodicities.
Suppose that an analyst prefers to convert money market rates to a semiannual
bond basis so that the rates are directly comparable to yields on bonds that make
semiannual coupon payments. The quoted rate for a 91-day Indian rupee T-bill is
3.50%, quoted as a bond equivalent yield, which means its periodicity is 365/91. We
use the periodicity conversion formula covered in a previous lesson to convert from
a periodicity m of 365/91 to n of 2:
m

n

вҖӢ m вҖӢ)вҖӢ вҖӢ = вҖӢ(1 + _
вҖӢ n вҖӢ)вҖӢ вҖӢ.вҖӢ
	вҖӢ(1 + _
AP вҖӢRвҖӢmвҖӢ

365
_

AP вҖӢRвҖӢnвҖӢ

AP вҖӢRвҖӢ вҖӢ 2

_2
	вҖӢ 1 + _
вҖӢ_
365 вҖӢ вҖӢ вҖӢ = вҖӢ(1 + вҖӢ 2 вҖӢ)вҖӢ вҖӢ.вҖӢ

(

0.035 вҖӢ91 вҖӢ
вҖӢ91 вҖӢ )

	вҖӢAP вҖӢRвҖӢ2вҖӢ = 0.03515 = 3.515 % .вҖӢ
Therefore, 3.50% for a periodicity of 365/91 corresponds to 3.515% for a periodicity
of 2. The difference is вҖ“1.5 bps. In general, the difference depends on the level of the
annual percentage rate. When interest rates are lower, the difference between the
annual rates for any two periodicities is reduced.

199

200

Learning Module 8

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
Yield and Yield Spread Measures for Floating-Rate Instruments

QUESTION SET
1. Identify the correct relationship for a money market instrument
quoted on a discount rate basis:
Days

A. вҖӢPV = FV Г— (1 вҲ’ _
вҖӢYear вҖӢГ— DR ) .вҖӢ

Year вҖӢГ— DR ) .вҖӢ
B. вҖӢF V = PV Г— (1 вҲ’ _
вҖӢDays
FV
.вҖӢвҖӢ
C. вҖӢPV = вҖӢ_
Days
_

Solution:

вҖӢ(1 + DR)вҖӢвҖӢYear вҖӢвҖӢ

A is correct. In the money market, the discount rate is a specific type of
quoted rate. Hence, the price or the present value of a money market instrument is determined by
Days

	вҖӢPV = FV Г— (1 вҲ’ _
вҖӢYear вҖӢГ— DR ) ,вҖӢ
where
PV = present value, or the price of the money market instrument
FV = the future value paid at maturity, or the face value of the money market
instrument
Days = the number of days between settlement and maturity
Year = the number of days in the year
DR = the discount rate, stated as an annual percentage rate
2. True or false: Yield measures in money market instruments are annualized
and compounded.
A. True
B. False
Solution:
False. Bond yields-to-maturity are annualized and compounded. However,
yield measures in money markets are annualized but not compounded.
3. True or false: Money market instruments use the standard time value of
money, such as discount rates or add-on rates.
A. True
B. False
Solution:
False. Bond yields-to-maturity are calculated using the standard time value
of money. Money market instruments are often quoted using non-standard
interest rates, such as discount rates or add-on rates.
4. True or false: Money market instruments with different times-to-maturity
have different periodicities.
A. True

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
Yield Measures for Money Market Instruments

B. False
Solution:
True. Money market instruments with different times-to-maturities have
different periodicities. However, bond yields-to-maturity are given for a
common periodicity for all times-to-maturity.
5. Explain the concept of a bond equivalent yield for a money market
instrument.
Solution:

A bond equivalent yield is the rate of return on a money market instrument
that is calculated with reference to the purchase price of the instrument
based on a 365-day year. The converted rate or yield can be used to compare
the return earned on the money market instrument with a similar return
earned by a bond.
6. A portfolio manager has asked you to evaluate the following Thai bahtвҖ“denominated money market instruments with equivalent credit risk.
вҖӢ

Money Market Instrument

Quotation Basis

Number of
Days in the
Year

Short-Term Thai T-Bills

Discount Rate

360

4.78%

Thai Bank Certificate of
Deposit

Discount Rate

365

4.81%

Thai Corporate Commercial
Paper

Add-On Rate

365

4.85%

Quoted
Rate

вҖӢ

Which instrument has the highest rate of return on a bond equivalent yield
basis?
A. Short-term Thai T-bills
B. Thai bank certificate of deposit
C. Thai corporate commercial paper
Solution:
A is correct. The bond equivalent yield for each instrument is most easily
calculated using a spreadsheet. Please refer to the candidate learning ecosystem online for a spreadsheet demonstrating the calculations in the downloadable Excel workbook. The short-term Thai T-bills offer the highest
return of 4.965% on a bond equivalent yield basis.
вҖӢ

Input

Money Market
Instrument

Short-Term
Thai T-Bill

Thai Bank CD

Thai
Corporate CP

Quotation Basis

Discount Rate

Discount Rate

Add-On Rate

Number of Days in
the Year

360

365

365

Quoted Rated (%)

4.78%

4.81%

4.85%

201

202

Learning Module 8

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
Yield and Yield Spread Measures for Floating-Rate Instruments

Money Market
Instrument

Short-Term
Thai T-Bill

Thai Bank CD

Thai
Corporate CP

PV/FV

97.610

97.628

102.392

Add-On-Rate

0.04965

0.04927

0.04850

Bond Equivalent
Yield (%)

4.965%

4.927%

4.850%

Output

вҖӢ

The following information relates to questions 7-8
A German insurance company buys a 91-day certificate of deposit with a
quoted add-on rate of 0.40% for a 365-day year.
7. If the initial payment amount is EUR20 million, calculate the redemption
amount due at maturity.
Solution:

The redemption amount can be calculated using Equation 4:
	вҖӢPV = _____________
вҖӢ _
вҖҜвҖҜ.вҖӢвҖӢ
Days
FV

(1 + вҖӢYear вҖӢГ— AOR)

	вҖӢ20, 000, 000 = вҖӢ_____________
вҖҜвҖҜвҖӢ.вҖӢ
91
_
FV
(1 + вҖӢ365 вҖӢГ— 0.0040)

	вҖӢFV = 20, 019, 945.вҖӢ
8. Suppose that after 31 days, the insurance company sells the CD. At the time
of the sale, the quoted add-on rate for a 60-day CD is 0.21%. Calculate the
sale price for the CD.
Solution:

After 31 days, the sale price of the certificate of deposit is also calculated
using Equation 4:
	вҖӢPV = _____________
вҖӢвҖҜвҖҜ
.вҖӢвҖӢ
Days
_
FV

(1 + вҖӢYear вҖӢГ— AOR)
20, 019, 945

вҖҜвҖҜ
вҖӢ.вҖӢ
	вҖӢPV = _____________
вҖӢвҖҜвҖҜ
60
_
(1 + вҖӢ365 вҖӢГ— 0.0021)

	вҖӢPV = 20, 013, 036.вҖӢ

Practice Problems

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.

PRACTICE PROBLEMS
1. A two-year floating-rate note issued by a French corporation pays the
three-month MRR of вҖ“0.55% plus 160 bps. The floater is priced at 101.20 per 100
of par value. Assuming the 30/360 day-count convention and 90 days per period,
the discount margin for the floater is closest to:
A. 25 bps.
B. 50 bps.
C. 110 bps.
2. Changes in the required margin for a floater usually come from:
A. shifts in the yield curve.
B. changes in credit risk.
C. increases or decrease in inflation.

The following information relates to questions
3-4
A fixed-income portfolio manager is looking to value a one-year US dollarвҖ“
denominated floating-rate note that has quarterly payments based on 90-day
MRR plus 80 bps. Assume the following information:
90-Day MRR: 2.5%
Quoted Margin: 80 bps
Discount Margin: 100 bps
Face Value: USD100
3. Without doing any calculation, this floating-rate note is priced at:
A. a premium.
B. a discount.
C. par.
4. The price of the FRN is closest to:
A. 98.804.
B. 99.804.
C. 100.804.
5. The bond equivalent yield of a 90-day European bank certificate of deposit quoted at a discount rate of 0.55% for a 360-day year is closest to:
A. 0.21%.

203

204

Learning Module 8

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
Yield and Yield Spread Measures for Floating-Rate Instruments

B. 0.24%.
C. 0.28%.
6. A 91-day UK gilt (Treasury bill) has a face value of GBP2 million, a discount rate
of 0.25%, and a price of GBP1.9 million. If a year has 366 days, the discount rate
for the UK gilt is closest to:
A. 0.1821.
B. 0.2011.
C. 0.2134.
7. Explain why a money market discount rate greater than zero understates the rate
of return to an investor and understates the cost of borrowed funds for the issuer.

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.

Solutions

SOLUTIONS
1. B is correct.
The estimated discount margin is 195 bps. Using the information provided, the
periodic PMT is equal to
(MRR + QM ) Г— FV

(вҲ’ 0.0055 + 0.016 ) Г— 100

______________
вҖӢ = __________________
вҖӢвҖҜвҖҜ
вҖӢ = 0.275.вҖӢ
	вҖӢвҖҜвҖҜ
m
4

Using the RATE function in Microsoft Excel, Google Sheets, or a financial calculator and using PV = вҖ“101.20, FV = 100, PMT =0.275, and N = 8, we solve for the
discount rate per period of 12.4161%. The discount margin can then be estimated
by solving for DM:
+ DM
_
вҖӢ.вҖӢ
	вҖӢr = вҖӢMRR
m
вҲ’ 0.005 + DM

вҖӢ.вҖӢ
вҖӢ
	вҖӢ0.124161 = _
4
	вҖӢDM = 0.502144.вҖӢ
The estimated discount margin is 50.2 bps.
2. B is correct. The required margin is the yield spread over or under a reference
rate, reflecting the credit risk of an issuer. Changes in the required margin typically come from a change in the issuerвҖҷs credit risk.
A and C are incorrect. Both risks, as вҖңtop-downвҖқ or macroeconomic risks, would
be reflected in changes in the MRR, not in a spread such as the required margin.
3. B is correct. This FRN is priced at a discount, because the quoted margin is less
than the discount (required) margin.
4. B is correct. The FRN is priced at 99.804 per 100 of par value. Using the information provided, the periodic PMT is equal to
(MRR + QM ) Г— FV

(0.025 + 0.008 ) Г— 100

______________
	вҖӢвҖҜвҖҜ
вҖӢ = ________________
вҖӢвҖҜвҖҜ
вҖӢ = 0.825.вҖӢ
m
4

The assumed discount rate per period is equal to 0.875%.
+ DM
_
вҖӢ.вҖӢ
	вҖӢr = вҖӢMRR
m
0.025 + 0.01

вҖӢ.вҖӢ
	вҖӢr = _
вҖӢ
4
	вҖӢr = 0.00875.вҖӢ
To value this FRN, take the present value of each cash flow using the discount
rate per period. The FRN is priced at 99.804 per 100 of par value.
0.825
вҖӢ(1 + 0.00875)вҖӢ вҖӢ

0.825
вҖӢ(1 + 0.00875)вҖӢ вҖӢ

0.825
вҖӢ(1 + 0.00875)вҖӢ вҖӢ

100.825
вҖӢ(1 + 0.00875)вҖӢ вҖӢ

	вҖӢPV = ___________
вҖӢвҖҜвҖҜ1 вҖӢ+ ___________
вҖӢвҖҜвҖҜ2 вҖӢ+ ___________
вҖӢвҖҜвҖҜ3 вҖӢ+ ___________
вҖӢвҖҜвҖҜ4 вҖӢ.вҖӢ
	вҖӢPV = 99.804.вҖӢ
5. C is correct. The bond equivalent yield is closest to 0.28%.
The present value of the bankerвҖҷs certificate of deposit is calculated as follows:
Days

	вҖӢPV = FV Г— (1 вҲ’ _
вҖӢYear вҖӢГ— DR ) .вҖӢ

205

206

Learning Module 8

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
Yield and Yield Spread Measures for Floating-Rate Instruments

90

	вҖӢPV = 100 Г— (1 вҲ’ _
вҖӢ360 вҖӢГ— 0.0055 ) .вҖӢ
	вҖӢPV = 99.865.вҖӢ
The bond equivalent yield (AOR using a 365-day year) is calculated to be approximately 0.28%:
Year

FV вҲ’ PV

365

100 вҲ’ 99.8625

	вҖӢAOR = _
вҖӢDays вҖӢГ— _
вҖӢ PV вҖӢ.вҖӢ
___________
	вҖӢAOR = вҖӢ_
90 вҖӢГ— вҖӢвҖҜвҖҜ
99.8625 вҖӢ.вҖӢ

	вҖӢAOR = 0.0028.вҖӢ
6. B is correct. The discount rate is closest to 0.2011.
Year

(FV вҲ’ PV)

366

(2, 000, 000 вҲ’ 1, 900, 000)

_
	вҖӢDR = вҖӢ_
вҖӢ.вҖӢ
Days вҖӢГ— вҖӢ FV

вҖӢвҖҜвҖҜ
вҖҜвҖҜ
вҖӢ.вҖӢ
	вҖӢDR = _
вҖӢ91 вҖӢГ— __________________
2, 000, 000
	вҖӢDR = 0.2011.вҖӢ

7. For a money market instrument, the discount rate is calculated as
Year

(FV вҲ’ PV)

	вҖӢDR = _
вҖӢDays вҖӢГ— _
вҖӢ FV вҖӢ.вҖӢ
The denominator for the second term is FV, not PV. In theory, an interest rate is
the amount earned divided by the investment amount (PV), not the maturity value (FV), which includes the earnings. So long as DR is greater than zero, FV will
be higher than PV. Therefore, by design, a money market discount rate understates the rate of return to the investor, and it understates the cost of borrowed
funds to the issuer.

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.

LEARNING MODULE

9

The Term Structure of Interest Rates:
Spot, Par, and Forward Curves
LEARNING OUTCOMES
Mastery

The candidate should be able to:
define spot rates and the spot curve, and calculate the price of a
bond using spot rates
define par and forward rates, and calculate par rates, forward rates
from spot rates, spot rates from forward rates, and the price of a
bond using forward rates
compare the spot curve, par curve, and forward curve

INTRODUCTION
Prior lessons priced fixed-income instruments by discounting all future cash flows
using a single interest rate, such as the yield-to-maturity or a market reference rate
(MRR) plus a discount margin. The next three lessons relax this assumption by introducing the term structure of interest rates, or the fact that interest rates vary with
time-to-maturity. The ideal data to use for term structure analysis are default-risk-free
zero-coupon bonds, known as spot rates or the spot curve. Since these are generally
not directly observable, various estimation techniques are used. The spot curve is used
to derive two other important yield curves: the par curve and the forward curve. A
par curve involves bond yields for hypothetical benchmark securities priced at par,
while the forward curve involves rates for interest periods starting in the future. All
three of these curves are fundamental to fixed-income analysis and other applications
because they represent default-risk-free rates of return for time periods that start
today and in the future. We show the pricing of bonds using these different rates and
establish their relationships.
LEARNING MODULE OVERVIEW
в– 

Spot rates are market discount rates on default-risk-free
zero-coupon bonds, sometimes referred to as zero rates. By
using a sequence of spot rates in calculating bond prices, a no-arbitrage bond price is obtained.

1

208

Learning Module 9

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
The Term Structure of Interest Rates: Spot, Par, and Forward Curves

в– 

A par rate is the market discount rate for a specific maturity that
would result in a bond priced at par. A par rate is derived from the
spot rates up to and including the maturity date.

в– 

Implied forward rates are calculated using spot rates and can be
interpreted as an incremental, or marginal, return for extending the
time-to-maturity for an additional time period. As such, they reflect a
breakeven reinvestment rate.

в– 

Since par and forward rates can be derived from spot rates, the shape
of the spot curve is closely related to the shape of the par and forward
curves.

в– 

In upward-sloping term structures, par rates will be lower than their
corresponding spot rates and forward rates will be greater than spot
rates. In downward-sloping term structures, par rates will be greater
than spot rates and forward rates will be lower than spot rates.

LEARNING MODULE SELF-ASSESSMENT
These initial questions are intended to help you gauge your current level
of understanding of this learning module.
1. Calculate the price and yield-to-maturity (YTM) of a 1% coupon, three-year
bond with par value of 100 given the following spot rates:
вҖӢ

1-year

1.0%

2-year

1.5%

3-year

2.0%
вҖӢ

Solution:
The price is 97.135:
PMT + FV

PV = _
вҖӢ PMT 1 вҖӢ+ _
вҖӢ PMT вҖӢ+ вӢҜ + _
вҖӢ
вҖӢ
вҖӢ(1 + вҖӢZвҖӢNвҖӢ)вҖӢNвҖӢ
вҖӢ(1 + вҖӢZвҖӢ1вҖӢ)вҖӢ вҖӢ вҖӢ(1 + вҖӢZвҖӢ2вҖӢ)вҖӢ2вҖӢ
вҖӢ 	вҖӢвҖҜвҖҜвҖҜвҖҜвҖӢ вҖӢ
101
вҖӢ 1 + 0.02 вҖӢ вҖӢ

1
вҖӢ(
вҖӢ+ _
вҖӢ(
вҖӢ
PV = _
вҖӢ( 1 ) 1 вҖӢ+ _
)2
)3
вҖӢ 1 + 0.01 вҖӢ вҖӢ

вҖӢ 1 + 0.015 вҖӢ вҖӢ

PV = 97.135
The YTM is 1.993%:
PMT + FV
вҖӢ1 + r вҖӢ вҖӢ

PV = _
вҖӢ( PMT) 1 вҖӢ+ _
вҖӢ( PMT) 2 вҖӢ+ вӢҜ + _
вҖӢ(
вҖӢ
)N
вҖӢ1 + r вҖӢ вҖӢ

вҖӢ1 + r вҖӢ вҖӢ

вҖӢ 	вҖӢвҖҜвҖҜвҖҜвҖҜвҖӢ вҖӢ
101
вҖӢ1 + r вҖӢ вҖӢ

вҖӢ( 1 ) 2 вҖӢ+ _
вҖӢ(
вҖӢ
97.135 = _
вҖӢ( 1 ) 1 вҖӢ+ _
)3
вҖӢ1 + r вҖӢ вҖӢ

вҖӢ1 + r вҖӢ вҖӢ

r = 0.01993 = 1.993%
2. Define what a par rate represents in the context of bond pricing.
Solution:

The par rate is the yield-to-maturity that makes the present value of a bondвҖҷs
cash flows (i.e., its price) equal to its par or face value.

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
Maturity Structure of Interest Rates and Spot Rates

209

3. Calculate an implied one-year forward rate two years from now (i.e., 2y1y)
given the following spot rates, assuming annual compounding:
вҖӢ

1-year

1.0%

2-year

1.5%

3-year

2.0%
вҖӢ

Solution:
(1 + ZA)A Г— (1 + IFRA,B вҖ“ A)B вҲ’ A = (1 + ZB)B.
(1 + 0.01)1 Г— (1 + IFR2,1)2 = (1 + 0.02)3.
IFR2,1 = 3.01%.
4. Explain the economic meaning of the forward rate result calculated in Question 3.
Solution:

The one-year forward rate two years from now (2y1y) of 3.01% implies that
investors expect the one-year interest rate to be 3.01% at the end of two
years. This reflects the rate at which reinvestment would yield the same
results over a three-year horizon regardless of whether the investor initially
bought a two-year bond versus a three-year bond.
5. Contrast spot and forward rates.
Solution:

Spot rates reflect borrowing and investing rates for funds immediately (or in
the next few days) over the specified tenor, while forward rates reflect rates
applicable to agreements to borrow or invest beginning on a future date for
a specified tenor.
6. True or false: One-year forward rates are higher compared to their corresponding spot rates when the spot rate curve is downward sloping.
A. True
B. False
Solution:
False. When the spot curve is downward sloping, the one-year forward
rate curve will lie below the spot rate curve. Declining spot rates for longer
maturities imply that investors should expect lower rates of reinvestment in
future years, and the forward curve reflects these expectations.

MATURITY STRUCTURE OF INTEREST RATES AND
SPOT RATES
define spot rates and the spot curve, and calculate the price of a
bond using spot rates

2

210

Learning Module 9

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
The Term Structure of Interest Rates: Spot, Par, and Forward Curves

Maturity Structure of Interest Rates
Suppose that the yield-to-maturity is higher on one bond compared to another bond.
There are several possible reasons for the difference, including credit risk, different
currencies, liquidity, tax differences, and the periodicity assumption used in the yield
calculation. Credit risk and currency differences were demonstrated in earlier lessons
where RomaniaвҖҷs (Ministry of Finance) 30-year euro-denominated bonds were issued
at a 4.657% yield-to-maturity, a 411 bp spread over Federal Republic of Germany
bonds. Another reason bonds may have different yields-to-maturity is that they have
different times-to-maturity. This factor explaining the differences in yields is called
the maturity structure of interest rates or term structure of interest rates.
Term structure is best analyzed using bonds that have all the same properties other
than time-to-maturity; that is, the bonds should be denominated in the same currency
and have the same credit risk, liquidity, tax status, and periodicity assumption and
they should have the same coupon rate so that they each have the same degree of
coupon reinvestment risk. This ideal dataset would be yields-to-maturity on a series
of default-risk-free zero-coupon bonds, known as spot rates, for a full range of maturities. Developed market sovereign bonds are typically used for this purpose, because
they represent the lowest default risk among issuers in a given market. Collectively,
this dataset is the government bond spot curve, sometimes called the zero or вҖңstripвҖқ
curve (because the coupon payments are вҖңstrippedвҖқ off the bonds).
The government bond spot curve is ideal for analyzing maturity structure because
it best meets the вҖңother things being equalвҖқ assumption. These government bonds
presumably have the same currency, credit risk, liquidity, and tax status. Most importantly, as zero-coupon bonds, they have no coupon reinvestment risk. A government
bond spot curve is illustrated in Exhibit 1 for maturities ranging from 1 to 30 years.
The annual yields are stated on a semiannual bond basis, which facilitates comparison
to coupon-bearing bonds that make semiannual payments, like corporate bonds in
many markets.

Exhibit 1: Government Bond Spot (Zero) Curve
Yield-to-Maturity (%)
6

5

4

3

2

1

0
0

5

10

15
Time-to-Maturity (years)

20

25

30

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
Maturity Structure of Interest Rates and Spot Rates

The spot curve in Exhibit 1 is upward sloping and flattens for longer times-to-maturity,
meaning that the longer-term government bonds have higher yields than the shorter-term
bonds. This pattern is typical under normal market conditions. Sometimes, a spot
curve is downward sloping in that shorter-term yields are higher than longer-term
yields. Such downward-sloping spot curves are called inverted yield curves. Theories
that attempt to explain the shape of the yield curve and its implications for future
financial market conditions are covered later.
While a spot curve comprised of zero-coupon government bonds is ideal for
analysis, there are several practical issues to contend with. First, most actively traded
government bonds make coupon payments. These coupon bonds might not have the
same liquidity and tax status. Older (вҖңseasonedвҖқ) bonds tend to be less liquid than
newly issued debt because they are owned by вҖңbuy-and-holdвҖқ institutional and retail
investors. Governments issue new debt for regular times-to-maturityвҖ”for instance,
5-year and 10-year bonds. The current 6-year bond could be a 10-year bond that was
issued four years ago. Also, because interest rates fluctuate, older bonds can be priced
at a discount or premium to par value, which can lead to tax differences because some
tax jurisdictions distinguish capital gains and losses from interest income.
In practice, therefore, only the most recently issued and actively traded government bonds are used to build a yield curve. These bonds have similar liquidity, and
because they are priced closer to par value, they have fewer tax effects. Additionally,
because there are limited data for the full range of maturities, interpolation is used
to complete the curve. Exhibit 2 illustrates a yield curve for a government that issues
2-year, 3-year, 5-year, 7-year, 10-year, and 30-year bonds that make semiannual coupon
payments. Straight-line interpolation is used between those points on the yield curve.

211

212

Learning Module 9

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
The Term Structure of Interest Rates: Spot, Par, and Forward Curves

Exhibit 2: Government Coupon Bond Yield Curve
Yield-to-Maturity (%)
3.0

2.5

2.0

1.5

1.0

0.5

0
0

5

10

15

20

25

30

Time-to-Maturity (years)
Yield-to-Maturity (%)
0.20

0.15

0.10

0.05

0
1

3

6

12

Time-to-Maturity (months)

Exhibit 2 also includes yields for short-term government securities having 1 month,
3 months, 6 months, and 12 months to maturity. Although these money market
instruments are issued and traded on a discount rate basis, they are converted to bond
equivalent yields (i.e., add-on rates with a 365-day year). All bonds on the yield curve
should also be converted to the same periodicity in order to facilitate comparisons
across times-to-maturity. Conversion from discount rates to bond equivalent yields
and across periodicities was demonstrated in prior lessons.

Bond Pricing Using Spot Rates
Since interest rates vary by maturity and have a term structure, we can price bonds
using a sequence of discount rates that correspond to the cash flow dates. One such
sequence, representing default-risk-free rates, is the spot curve. Bond prices determined using spot rates establish вҖңno-arbitrageвҖқ prices; if a bondвҖҷs price differs from its
no-arbitrage value, an arbitrage opportunity exists in the absence of transaction costs.

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
Maturity Structure of Interest Rates and Spot Rates

Suppose that the one-year spot rate is 2%, the two-year spot rate is 3%, and the
three-year spot rate is 4%. Then, the price of a three-year bond that makes a 5% annual
coupon payment is 102.960:
5
5
105
_
	вҖӢ (
вҖӢ+ _
вҖӢ
вҖӢ+ _
вҖӢ
вҖӢ=вҖӢ
вҖӢ 1.02)вҖӢ1вҖӢ вҖӢ(1.03)вҖӢ2вҖӢ вҖӢ(1.04)вҖӢ3вҖӢ

4.902 + 4.713 + 93.345 = 102.960.
This three-year bond is priced at a premium, so its yield-to-maturity must be less
than its 5% coupon rate. Using the basic bond pricing formula, the yield-to-maturity
is 3.935%:
5
вҖӢ1 + r вҖӢ вҖӢ

5
вҖӢ1 + r вҖӢ вҖӢ

105
вҖӢ1 + r вҖӢ вҖӢ

	вҖӢ102.960 = _
вҖӢ(
вҖӢ+ _
вҖӢ(
вҖӢ+ _
вҖӢ(
вҖӢ; r = 0.03935.вҖӢ
)1
)2
)3
If the cash flows are discounted using the yield-to-maturity, the same price is
obtained:
5
вҖӢ 1.03935 вҖӢ вҖӢ

5
вҖӢ 1.03935 вҖӢ вҖӢ

105
вҖӢ 1.03935 вҖӢ вҖӢ

вҖӢ+ _
вҖӢ(
вҖӢ+ _
вҖӢ(
вҖӢ=вҖӢ
	вҖӢ_
(
)1
)2
)3
4.811 + 4.629 + 93.520 = 102.960.
Notice that the present values of the individual cash flows discounted using spot rates
differ from those discounted using the yield-to-maturity. The present value of the first
coupon payment is 4.902 when discounted at 2%, but it is 4.811 when discounted at
3.935%. The present value of the final cash flow, which includes the redemption of
principal, is 93.345 at 4% and 93.520 at 3.935%. Nevertheless, the sum of the present
values using either approach is 102.960.
Equation 1 is a general formula for calculating a bond price given the sequence
of spot rates. Note that for pricing a bond with a different risk profile than the spot
curve (such as credit risk, as for corporate bonds, for example), a spread would have
to be added to the spot rates.
PMT + FV

	вҖӢPV = _
вҖӢ PMT 1 вҖӢ+ _
вҖӢ PMT вҖӢ+ вӢҜ + _
вҖӢ
вҖӢ,вҖӢ	
вҖӢ(1 + вҖӢZN
вҖӢ вҖӢ)вҖӢNвҖӢ
вҖӢ(1 + вҖӢZ1вҖӢ вҖӢ)вҖӢ вҖӢ вҖӢ(1 + вҖӢZ2вҖӢ вҖӢ)вҖӢ2вҖӢ

(1)

where
Z1 is the spot rate, or zero-coupon yield or zero rate, for period 1
Z2 is the spot rate, or zero-coupon yield or zero rate, for period 2
ZN is the spot rate, or zero-coupon yield or zero rate, for period N
WeвҖҷll use spot rates on Canadian and Australian government bonds to demonstrate
bond pricing with spot rates.

213

214

Learning Module 9

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
The Term Structure of Interest Rates: Spot, Par, and Forward Curves

Exhibit 3: Government Bond Spot Rates: Canada and Australia
Spot Rates (%)
3.0
2.5
2.0
1.5
1.0
0.5
0
1 2 3 45

7

10

20

30

Years until Maturity
Canada
Australia

Maturity
(Years)

1

2

3

4

5

7

10

20

30

Canada

0.31%

0.57%

0.80%

0.96%

1.11%

1.30%

1.58%

1.98%

2.06%

Australia

0.03%

0.07%

0.30%

0.59%

0.81%

1.17%

1.52%

2.35%

2.47%

EXAMPLE 1

Bond Prices and Yields-to-Maturity Based on Spot Rates
1. Calculate the price (per 100 par value) of a five-year Canadian government
bond with a 1.00% coupon given the spot rates shown in Exhibit 3.
Solution:

99.50. To calculate the price of the bond, we use Equation 1 and the spot
rates provided for each cash flow.
PMT + FV

вҖӢ PMT вҖӢ+ вӢҜ + _
вҖӢ
вҖӢ.
PV = _
вҖӢ PMT 1 вҖӢ+ _
вҖӢ(1 + вҖӢZN
вҖӢ вҖӢ)вҖӢNвҖӢ
вҖӢ(1 + вҖӢZ1вҖӢ вҖӢ)вҖӢ вҖӢ вҖӢ(1 + вҖӢZ2вҖӢ вҖӢ)вҖӢ2вҖӢ
вҖӢ 	вҖӢвҖҜвҖҜвҖҜвҖҜвҖӢ

вҖӢ

101
1
1
1
1
вҖӢ+ _
вҖӢ
вҖӢ+ _
вҖӢ
вҖӢ+ _
вҖӢ
вҖӢ+ _
вҖӢ
вҖӢ.
PV = _
вҖӢ(
вҖӢ 1 + 0.0031)вҖӢ1вҖӢ (вҖӢ 1 + 0.0057)вҖӢ2вҖӢ (вҖӢ 1 + 0.0080)вҖӢ3вҖӢ (вҖӢ 1 + 0.0096)вҖӢ4вҖӢ (вҖӢ 1 + 0.0111)вҖӢ5вҖӢ

PV = 99.50.
2. Calculate the price (per 100 par value) of a five-year Australian government
bond with a 0.80% coupon given the spot rates shown in Exhibit 3.
Solution:

100.01. To calculate the price of the bond, we use Equation 1 and the spot
rates provided for each cash flow.
PMT + FV

PMT
PV = вҖӢ_
вҖӢ+ _
вҖӢ PMT вҖӢ+ вӢҜ + _
вҖӢ
вҖӢ.
вҖӢ(1 + вҖӢZвҖӢNвҖӢ)вҖӢNвҖӢ
вҖӢ(1 + вҖӢZвҖӢ1вҖӢ)вҖӢ1вҖӢ вҖӢ(1 + вҖӢZвҖӢ2вҖӢ)вҖӢ2вҖӢ
вҖӢ 	вҖӢвҖҜвҖҜвҖҜвҖҜвҖӢ

вҖӢ

0.80
0.80
0.80
0.80
100.80
PV = _
вҖӢ(
вҖӢ+ _
вҖӢ
вҖӢ+ _
вҖӢ
вҖӢ+ _
вҖӢ
вҖӢ+ _
вҖӢ
вҖӢ.
вҖӢ 1 + 0.0003)вҖӢ1вҖӢ вҖӢ(1 + 0.0007)вҖӢ2вҖӢ вҖӢ(1 + 0.0030)вҖӢ3вҖӢ вҖӢ(1 + 0.0059)вҖӢ4вҖӢ вҖӢ(1 + 0.0081)вҖӢ5вҖӢ

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
Maturity Structure of Interest Rates and Spot Rates

PV = 100.01
3. Calculate the YTM of the five-year Canadian government bond, using the
price obtained in Question 1.
Solution:

1.104%. Instead of solving for the price, we use Equation 1 to solve for the
YTM, the IRR that equates the price computed in Question 1 with the
present value of future cash flows. In Microsoft Excel or Google Sheets, the
RATE or IRR function can be used to solve for r.
PMT + FV
вҖӢ1 + r вҖӢ вҖӢ

PV = _
вҖӢ( PMT) 1 вҖӢ+ _
вҖӢ( PMT) 2 вҖӢ+ вӢҜ + _
вҖӢ(
вҖӢ
)N
вҖӢ1 + r вҖӢ вҖӢ

вҖӢ1 + r вҖӢ вҖӢ

вҖӢ 	вҖӢвҖҜвҖҜвҖҜвҖҜвҖӢ

вҖӢ=

101
вҖӢ 1 вҖӢ+ _
вҖӢ 1 вҖӢ+ _
вҖӢ 1 вҖӢ+ _
вҖӢ
вҖӢ
99.50 = _
вҖӢ( 1 ) 1 вҖӢ+ _
вҖӢ 1 + r вҖӢ вҖӢ вҖӢ(1 + r)вҖӢ2вҖӢ вҖӢ(1 + r)вҖӢ3вҖӢ вҖӢ(1 + r)вҖӢ4вҖӢ вҖӢ(1 + r)вҖӢ5вҖӢ

r = 0.011036 = 1.104%
Notice that the yield of the coupon bond is slightly below the five-year spot
rate.

QUESTION SET
1. True or false: In practice, a spot curve is created by calculating the
yields-to-maturity on recently issued coupon-paying government bonds of
varying maturities.
A. True
B. False
Solution:
True. While zero-coupon government risk-free bonds would be preferable,
in practice, the spot curve is created using yields on recently issued coupon-paying government bonds and linear interpolation. These bonds best
satisfy the conditions for term structure analysis.
2. Determine the missing word in the following sentence: Because there are
usually limited data to calculate yields for the full range of maturities, it is
usually necessary to __________ between observed yields to complete curve
data.
Solution:

Because there are usually limited data to calculate yields for the full range of
maturities, it is usually necessary to interpolate between observed yields to
complete curve data.
3. Calculate the price and yield-to-maturity of a 2.5% coupon, five-year bond
given the following spot rates. Assume annual compounding.
вҖӢ

1-year

3.000%

2-year

2.800%

3-year

2.600%

215

216

Learning Module 9

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
The Term Structure of Interest Rates: Spot, Par, and Forward Curves

4-year

2.400%

5-year

2.200%
вҖӢ

Solution:
The price is 101.314.
PMT + FV

PV = _
вҖӢ PMT 1 вҖӢ+ _
вҖӢ PMT вҖӢ+ вӢҜ + _
вҖӢ
вҖӢ.
вҖӢ(1 + вҖӢZN
вҖӢ вҖӢ)вҖӢNвҖӢ
вҖӢ(1 + вҖӢZ1вҖӢ вҖӢ)вҖӢ вҖӢ вҖӢ(1 + вҖӢZ2вҖӢ вҖӢ)вҖӢ2вҖӢ
вҖӢ 	вҖӢвҖҜвҖҜвҖҜвҖҜвҖӢ

вҖӢ

2.50
2.50
2.50
2.50
102.50
вҖӢ+ _
вҖӢ
вҖӢ+ _
вҖӢ
вҖӢ+ _
вҖӢ
вҖӢ+ _
вҖӢ
вҖӢ.
PV = _
вҖӢ(
вҖӢ 1 + 0.03)вҖӢ1вҖӢ (вҖӢ 1 + 0.028)вҖӢ2вҖӢ (вҖӢ 1 + 0.026)вҖӢ3вҖӢ (вҖӢ 1 + 0.024)вҖӢ4вҖӢ (вҖӢ 1 + 0.022)вҖӢ5вҖӢ

PV = 101.34
The YTM is 2.22%.
PMT + FV
вҖӢ1 + r вҖӢ вҖӢ

PV = _
вҖӢ( PMT) 1 вҖӢ+ _
вҖӢ(
вҖӢ
вҖӢ( PMT) 2 вҖӢ+ вӢҜ + _
)N
вҖӢ1 + r вҖӢ вҖӢ

вҖӢ1 + r вҖӢ вҖӢ

вҖӢ 	вҖӢвҖҜвҖҜвҖҜвҖҜвҖӢ
2.50
вҖӢ1 + r вҖӢ вҖӢ

2.50
вҖӢ1 + r вҖӢ вҖӢ

2.50
вҖӢ1 + r вҖӢ вҖӢ

вҖӢ

2.50
вҖӢ1 + r вҖӢ вҖӢ

102.50
вҖӢ1 + r вҖӢ вҖӢ

101.34 = _
вҖӢ(
вҖӢ+ _
вҖӢ(
вҖӢ+ _
вҖӢ(
вҖӢ+ _
вҖӢ(
вҖӢ+ _
вҖӢ(
вҖӢ
)5
)1
)2
)3
)4
r = 0.022195 = 2.22%
4. Suppose we observed the following term structure for Canadian government bonds. Calculate the price of a 0.50% coupon, three-year Canadian
government bond.
вҖӢ

Maturity

Yield-to-maturity

1-Year

1.1000%

2-Year

0.9500%

3-Year

0.7951%

4-Year

0.5700%

5-Year

0.3100%
вҖӢ

Solution:
The price is 99.126.
PMT + FV

вҖӢ PMT вҖӢ+ вӢҜ + _
вҖӢ
вҖӢ.
PV = _
вҖӢ PMT 1 вҖӢ+ _
вҖӢ(1 + вҖӢZвҖӢNвҖӢ)вҖӢNвҖӢ
вҖӢ(1 + вҖӢZвҖӢ1вҖӢ)вҖӢ вҖӢ вҖӢ(1 + вҖӢZвҖӢ2вҖӢ)вҖӢ2вҖӢ
вҖӢ 	вҖӢвҖҜвҖҜвҖҜвҖҜвҖӢ

вҖӢ

0.50
0.50
100.50
PV = _
вҖӢ(
вҖӢ+ _
вҖӢ
вҖӢ+ ____________
вҖӢвҖҜвҖҜвҖӢ
вҖӢ 1 + 0.011)вҖӢ1вҖӢ вҖӢ(1 + 0.095)вҖӢ2вҖӢ вҖӢ(1 + 0.007951)вҖӢ3вҖӢ

PV = 99.126
5. Example 1 includes a question for a 0.50% coupon, three-year Canadian
government bond, in which the bondвҖҷs price is the same as the 99.126 price
in Question 4 above. Contrast the Canadian spot curves in Example 1 and
Question 4 and explain why these two different yield curves produced the
same pricing result.
Solution:

Example 1 has an upward-sloping term structure, while in Question 4,
the term structure is downward sloping. An important similarity is that,
despite the vast difference in starting points (i.e., the one-year spot rates)

Par and Forward Rates

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.

217

between the two examples, the three-year spot rates are similar. In Example
1, the three-year rate is 0.7977%, and the three-year rate in Question 4 is
0.7951%. As a result of the similarity of the spot rates in the upward- and
downward-sloping term structure examples, it is possible to exhibit the
same price (and YTM) in upward- and downward-sloping term structure
environments.

3

PAR AND FORWARD RATES
define par and forward rates, and calculate par rates, forward rates
from spot rates, spot rates from forward rates, and the price of a
bond using forward rates

Par Rates from Spot Rates
An important use of spot rates is determining par rates. A par rate is a yield-to-maturity
that makes the present value of a bondвҖҷs cash flows equal to par (100% of face value).
Par rates derived for hypothetical government bonds with different times-to-maturity
are commonly used for term structure analysis because they control for tax, trading,
and other potential distortions associated with actual bonds priced at either a discount
or premium. The widely cited US Treasury yield curve published each day by the US
Department of the Treasury, for example, is composed of par rates. The most recently
issued or on-the-run government securities introduced in an earlier lesson, however,
are actual bonds whose yields-to-maturity are close to but not equal to par rates.
On a coupon payment date, the following equation can be used to calculate a par
rate by solving for PMT given a sequence of spot rates Z1, Z2, . . . , Zn. Between coupon
dates, we set the flat price, rather than the full price, equal to 100.
PMT + 100

	вҖӢ100 = _
вҖӢ PMT 1 вҖӢ+ _
вҖӢ PMT вҖӢ+ вӢҜ + _
вҖӢ
вҖӢ.вҖӢ	
вҖӢ(1 + вҖӢzвҖӢNвҖӢ)вҖӢNвҖӢ
вҖӢ(1 + вҖӢzвҖӢ1вҖӢ)вҖӢ вҖӢ вҖӢ(1 + вҖӢzвҖӢ2вҖӢ)вҖӢ2вҖӢ

(2)

This equation is very similar to Equation 1, except PV = FV = 100. Recall that for
a bond to trade at par, its coupon rate and yield-to-maturity must be equal. So, by
solving for PMT, we also solve for the yield-to-maturity for the bond to trade at par.
This single rate, divided by 100, is the par rate per period.
An example illustrates the calculation of par rates given spot rates. Suppose the
current one-, two-, three-, and four- year spot rates on government bonds are 5.263%,
5.616%, 6.359%, and 7.008%, respectively. These are effective annual rates.
The one-year par rate is 5.263%:
PMT + 100
вҖӢ 1.05263 вҖӢ вҖӢ

	вҖӢ100 = _
вҖӢ(
вҖӢ; PMT = 5.263.вҖӢ
)1
The two-year par rate is 5.606%.
PMT + 100
вҖӢ 1.05616 вҖӢ вҖӢ

	вҖӢ100 = _
вҖӢ( PMT ) 1 вҖӢ+ _
вҖӢ(
вҖӢ; PMT = 5.606.вҖӢ
)2
вҖӢ 1.05263 вҖӢ вҖӢ

The three-year and four-year par rates are 6.306% and 6.899%, respectively.
PMT + 100
вҖӢ 1.06359 вҖӢ вҖӢ

	вҖӢ100 = _
вҖӢ( PMT ) 1 вҖӢ+ _
вҖӢ( PMT ) 2 вҖӢ+ _
вҖӢ(
вҖӢ; PMT = 6.306.вҖӢ
)3
вҖӢ 1.05263 вҖӢ вҖӢ

вҖӢ 1.05616 вҖӢ вҖӢ

PMT + 100
вҖӢ 1.07008 вҖӢ вҖӢ

вҖӢ( PMT ) 2 вҖӢ+ _
вҖӢ( PMT ) 3 вҖӢ+ _
вҖӢ(
вҖӢ; PMT = 6.899.вҖӢ
	вҖӢ100 = _
вҖӢ( PMT ) 1 вҖӢ+ _
)4
вҖӢ 1.05263 вҖӢ вҖӢ

вҖӢ 1.05616 вҖӢ вҖӢ

вҖӢ 1.06359 вҖӢ вҖӢ

218

Learning Module 9

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
The Term Structure of Interest Rates: Spot, Par, and Forward Curves

We can confirm that these are the par rates through the pricing formula. Using these
par rates as the coupon and yield-to-maturity, the price of the two-year bond is 100:
5.606/(1.05606)1 + 105.606/(1.05606)2 = 100.

Likewise, the price of the four-year bond is also 100:

6.899/(1.06899)1 + 6.899/(1.06899)2 + 6.899/(1.06899)3 + 106.899/(1.06899)4
= 100.

EXAMPLE 2

Bond Prices and Yields-to-Maturity Based on Par Rates
1. The par rate for a bond may be calculated from the set of spot rates reflecting maturities up to and including the maturity of the desired par rate. Using
the spot rate data shown in Exhibit 1, calculate the par rate for a three-year
Canadian government bond. In this example (and subsequent examples),
annual payments and compounding are assumed.
Solution:

Use Equation 2 to solve for PMT, as follows:
PMT + 100

100 = _
вҖӢ PMT 1 вҖӢ+ _
вҖӢ PMT вҖӢ+ вӢҜ + _
вҖӢ
вҖӢ.
вҖӢ(1 + вҖӢzвҖӢNвҖӢ)вҖӢNвҖӢ
вҖӢ(1 + вҖӢzвҖӢ1вҖӢ)вҖӢ вҖӢ вҖӢ(1 + вҖӢzвҖӢ2вҖӢ)вҖӢ2вҖӢ
вҖӢ 	вҖӢвҖҜвҖҜвҖҜвҖҜвҖӢ

вҖӢ

PMT + 100
PMT
100 = ____________
вҖӢ(вҖҜвҖҜ
вҖӢ+ _
вҖӢ PMT вҖӢ+ _
вҖӢ
вҖӢ.
вҖӢ 1 + 0.003117)вҖӢ1вҖӢ вҖӢ(1 + 0.568)вҖӢ2вҖӢ вҖӢ(1 + 0.7977)вҖӢ3вҖӢ

We can factor out PMT and then solve for it:
100
вҖӢ 1 + 0.7977 вҖӢ вҖӢ

1
1
1
вҖҜвҖҜ
вҖӢ+ _
вҖӢ(
вҖӢ+ _
вҖӢ(
вҖӢ) + вҖӢ_
вҖӢ.вҖӢ
	вҖӢ100 = PMT Г— (вҖӢ____________
)2
(
)1
)3
(
)3
вҖӢ 1 + 0.003117 вҖӢ вҖӢ

вҖӢ 1 + 0.568 вҖӢ вҖӢ

вҖӢ 1 + 0.7977 вҖӢ вҖӢ

PMT = 0.7952.
To convert the coupon payment to a par rate per period, we divide by 100
(i.e., 0.7952/100). Thus, the par rate equals 0.7952%.

Forward Rates from Spot Rates
Spot rates can also be used to calculate implied forward rates (also known as forward
yields), which are breakeven reinvestment rates. They link the return on an investment
in a shorter-term zero-coupon bond to the return on an investment in a longer-term
zero-coupon bond.
Suppose that the yields-to-maturity on three-year and four-year zero-coupon bonds
are 3.65% and 4.18%, respectively. An analyst would like to know how much extra
return is implied by these rates for investing for four rather than three years (i.e., an
incremental year). This would be the implied one-year forward yield three years into
the future, depicted in Exhibit 4.

Par and Forward Rates

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.

Exhibit 4: The One-Year Implied Rate, Three Years from Today
Time
t=0

t=3

3-year zero

t=4
Implied forward rate =
3y1y

ZA = 3.65%

4-year zero
ZB = 4.18%

The most common market practice is to name this forward rate the вҖң3y1y,вҖқ pronounced
вҖңthree-year into one-year rate,вҖқ or simply вҖң3вҖҷs, 1вҖҷs.вҖқ The first number refers to the length
of the forward period in years from today, and the second number refers to the tenor
of the underlying bond, or its remaining time-to-maturity. In the money market, the
forward rate is usually expressed in months.
If the investorвҖҷs view on future bond yields is that the one-year yield in three yearsвҖҷ
time is likely to be lower than the 3y1y, it might be better to simply invest in the
four-year zero-coupon bond. However, if the investorвҖҷs view is that the one-year yield
will be more than the implied forward rate, the investor might prefer the three-year
bond and then reinvest at the expected higher rate for an additional one year. That
explains why an implied forward rate is the breakeven reinvestment rate.
Equation 3 is a general formula for the implied forward rate, IFR A,BвҖ“A, for a security
begins at t = A and matures at t = B (tenor B вҖ“ A). To solve for it, we need the spot
rate, zA, and the longer-term spot rate, zB. This is illustrated in Exhibit 5.
(1 + ZA)A Г— (1 + IFRA,B вҖ“ A)B вҖ“ A= (1 + ZB)B.

(3)

Exhibit 5: Implied Forward Rates
Time
t=0
Shorter-term bond A

t=A

Implied forward rate
IFR A,B вҖ“ A

ZA

Longer-term bond B

t=B

ZB

Using Equation 3, letвҖҷs solve for the 3y1y since we know that the yields-to-maturity
on three-year and four-year zero-coupon bonds are 3.65% and 4.18%, respectively:
(1 + ZA)A Г— (1 + IFRA,B вҖ“ A)B вҖ“ A= (1 + ZB)B.

(1 + 0.0365)3 Г— (1 + IFR3,1)1 = (1 + 0.0418)4.

219

220

Learning Module 9

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
The Term Structure of Interest Rates: Spot, Par, and Forward Curves

IFR3,1 = 0.057863 = 5.79%
The вҖң3y1yвҖқ implied forward yield is 5.79%. If the investor believes that the one-year
yield will be higher than that in three years, she should invest in the three-year bond
rather than the four-year bond (and vice versa).
EXAMPLE 3

Deriving Forward Rates from Spot Rates
1. LetвҖҷs return to the spot rates shown in Exhibit 1. In the following example,
we will assume annual compounding (i.e., periodicity of 1). Calculate the
2y1y implied forward rate on Canadian government bonds.
Solution:

To calculate the 2y1y implied forward rate, we recognize that we are estimating the one-year rate at a point two years from Time 0. Therefore, A = 1,
B = 3, Z A is the two-year spot rate, and ZB is the three-year spot rate:
(1 + ZA)A Г— (1 + IFRA,B вҖ“ A)B вҖ“ A = (1 + ZB)B.
(1 + 0.00568)2 Г— (1 + IFR2,1)1 = (1 + 0.007977)3.
IFR2,1 = 0.0126.
Thus, the implied forward rate for a one-year bond two years from now is
1.26%.

Spot Rates from Forward Rates and Bond Pricing with Forward
Rates
While forward rates can be calculated from spot rates, spot rates can also be calculated
from forward rates, and either can be used for pricing because they are interconnected.
An example will illustrate this process.
Suppose the current sequence of one-year rates today and the one-year rate one,
two, and three years from now are as follows:
Time Period

Forward Rate

0y1y

1.88%

1y1y

2.77%

2y1y

3.54%

3y1y

4.12%

These are annual rates stated for a periodicity of 1. They are effective annual rates. The
first rate, the 0y1y, is the one-year spot rate. The others are one-year forward rates.
Spot rates can be calculated using Equation 3. The two-year implied spot rate is 2.324%:
(1 + ZA)A Г— (1 + IFRA,B вҖ“ A)B вҖ“ A= (1 + ZB)B.

(1 + 0.0188)2 Г— (1 + 0.0277)1 = (1 + Z2)3.
Z2 = 0.023240 = 2.324%

Par and Forward Rates

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.

Notice how the product of the 0y1y and 1y1y is the two-year spot rate. This property
holds in general, because the spot curve can be calculated by taking the geometric
average of the forward rates. This is evident if we solve for the implied three- and
four-year spot rates. Using Equation 3, we can use the implied two-year spot rate we
just found to solve for the three-year spot rate:
(1 + ZA)A Г— (1 + IFRA,B вҖ“ A)B вҖ“ A= (1 + ZB)B.

(1 + 0.023240)2 Г— (1 + 0.0277)1 = (1 + Z3)3.
Z3 = 0.027278 = 2.73%
Or since the two-year spot rate is the product of the 0y1y and 1y1y rates, we can simply
multiply across the forward curve for three- and four-year spot rates:
(1.0188 Г— 1.0277 Г— 1.0354) = (1+ Z3)3; Z3 = 0.27278

(1.0188 Г— 1.0277 Г— 1.0354 Г— 1.0412) = (1 + Z4)4; Z4 = 0.030741
Suppose that an analyst needs to value a four-year 3.75% annual coupon payment
bond that has the same risks as the bonds used to obtain the forward curve. Using
the implied spot rates, the value of the bond is 102.637 per 100 of par value.
3.75
3.75
3.75
103.75
_
вҖӢ+ _
вҖӢ
вҖӢ+ _
вҖӢ
вҖӢ+ _
вҖӢ
вҖӢ = 102.637.вҖӢ
	вҖӢ (
вҖӢ 1.0188)вҖӢ1вҖӢ вҖӢ(1.023240)вҖӢ2вҖӢ вҖӢ(1.027278)вҖӢ3вҖӢ вҖӢ(1.030741)вҖӢ4вҖӢ

The bond also can be valued using the forward rates as follows:
3.75
3.75
3.75
_
вҖӢвҖҜвҖҜ
вҖӢ+ ____________________
вҖӢвҖҜвҖҜ
вҖҜвҖҜвҖӢ
вҖӢвҖӢ(1.0188)вҖӢвҖӢ+ _____________
вҖӢ(1.0188 Г— 1.0277)вҖӢ вҖӢ(1.0188 Г— 1.0277 Г— 1.0354)вҖӢ
вҖӢвҖӢ
	вҖӢвҖҜвҖҜвҖҜвҖҜвҖҜ
103.75
__________________________
+ вҖӢвҖҜвҖҜ
вҖҜвҖҜвҖҜ
вҖӢ
=
102.637.
вҖӢ(1.0188 Г— 1.0277 Г— 1.0354 Г— 1.0412)вҖӢ

EXAMPLE 4

Deriving Spot Rates from Forward Rates and Pricing
Bonds Using Forward Rates
Suppose we have the following forward rates for Canadian government bonds:
вҖӢ

Forward tenor

Rates

0y1y

0.3117%

1y1y

0.8250%

2y1y

1.2587%

1y2y

1.0416%
вҖӢ

1. Calculate a three-year spot rate on Canadian government bonds using the
forward rate information.
Solution:

The three-year spot rate is calculated using three of the one-year forward
rates above: the 0y1y, 1y1y, and 2y1y.
(1.003117 Г— 1.008250 Г— 1.012587) = (1 + z3)3.
z3 = 0.7977%.

221

222

Learning Module 9

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
The Term Structure of Interest Rates: Spot, Par, and Forward Curves

2. Calculate the value of a three-year Canadian government bond paying a
0.50% coupon using forward rates.
Solution:

0.5

0.5

100.50

_________________________
вҖӢ(1.003117
вҖҜвҖҜ
вҖҜвҖҜвҖҜ
	вҖӢPV = _
вҖӢ1.003117 вҖӢ+ ________________
Г— 1.008250) вҖӢ+ вҖӢвҖҜвҖҜ
(1.003117
Г— 1.008250 Г— 1.0012587) вҖӢ

PV = 99.126
This example corresponds to Question 4 in the earlier Lesson Question Set.
A review of the solution to that problem indicates that we have shown that
the value of the three-year 0.50% coupon Canadian government bond is
equal to 99.126 regardless of whether we use spot rates or forward rates.

QUESTION SET
1. Contrast a par rate and a yield-to-maturity.
Solution:

A par rate is the YTM and coupon rate assuming a bond is priced at par
value and cash flows are discounted using spot rates, while the yield-to-maturity is the internal rate of return on a bondвҖҷs cash flows using a bondвҖҷs
current price.
2. Calculate a three-year par rate given the following spot rates. Assume annual compounding:
вҖӢ

1-year

3.0000%

2-year

2.8000%

3-year

2.6000%
вҖӢ

Solution:
2.607%.
вҖӢ(1 + вҖӢzвҖӢ1вҖӢ)вҖӢ вҖӢ

вҖӢ(1 + вҖӢzвҖӢ2вҖӢ)вҖӢ вҖӢ

PMT + 100
вҖӢ(1 + вҖӢzвҖӢNвҖӢ)вҖӢ вҖӢ

PMT
_

PMT
_

PMT
_

100 = _
вҖӢ PMT 1 вҖӢ+ _
вҖӢ
вҖӢ PMT 2 вҖӢ+ ... + _
N вҖӢ
вҖӢ

PMT
+ 100
_

вҖӢ+ вҖӢ
вҖӢ+ вҖӢ
вҖӢ
вҖӢ вҖӢ 	вҖӢ100 = вҖӢвҖӢ(1 + 0.03)вҖӢ1вҖӢвҖӢ+ вҖӢ
вҖҜвҖҜвҖҜвҖҜвҖҜ
вҖҜвҖҜвҖҜвҖҜ
вҖӢ(1 + 0.028)вҖӢ2вҖӢ вҖӢ(1 + 0.026)вҖӢ3вҖӢвҖӢ вҖӢ(1 + 0.026)вҖӢ3вҖӢ
вҖӢ

вҖӢ

100
вҖӢ(1 + 0.026)вҖӢ вҖӢ

1
1
1
_
_
_
100 = PMT Г— (вҖӢ_
1 вҖӢ+ вҖӢ
2 вҖӢ+ вҖӢ
3 вҖӢ) + вҖӢ
3вҖӢ
вҖӢ(1 + 0.03)вҖӢ вҖӢ

PMT = 2.607%

вҖӢ(1 + 0.028)вҖӢ вҖӢ

вҖӢ(1 + 0.026)вҖӢ вҖӢ

Par and Forward Rates

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.

3. Match the implied forward rate to the spot rates necessary to calculate it.
вҖӢ

1. 1y2y

A. Three-year and two-year spot rates

2. 3y2y

B. Three-year and one-year spot rates

3. 2y1y

C. Five-year and three-year spot rates
вҖӢ

Solution:
1. B. The 1y2y is a two-year forward rate in one year. Thus, we start with the
three-year spot rate and use the one-year spot rate to find an implied twoyear forward rate.
2. C. The 3y2y is a two-year forward rate in three years. Thus, we start with
the five-year spot rate and use the three-year spot rate to find an implied
two-year forward rate.
3. A. The 2y1y is a one-year forward rate in two years. Thus, we start with
the three-year spot rate and use the two-year spot rate to find an implied
one-year forward rate.
4. Determine the missing words in the following sentence: An implied forward
rate represents a ____________ reinvestment rate such that no arbitrage
opportunities exist between spot and forward rates.
Solution:

An implied forward rate represents a breakeven reinvestment rate such that
no arbitrage opportunities exist between spot and forward rates.
5. Calculate the implied forward rate 2y3y given the following spot rates. Assume annual compounding.
вҖӢ

Tenor

Spot Rate

1-year

2.0%

2-year

2.3%

3-year

2.5%

4-year

2.6%

5-year

2.4%
вҖӢ

Solution:
2.467%.
(1 + ZA)A Г— (1 + IFRA,B вҖ“ A)B вҖ“ A = (1 + ZB)B
(1 + 0.023)2 Г— (1 + IFR2,3)3 = (1 + 0.024)5
Z3= 2.467%
6. Calculate the price of a 2% coupon bond with 100 par value maturing in
three years given the following forward rates, and demonstrate that this
price is equivalent regardless of whether spot rates or forward rates are used

223

224

Learning Module 9

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
The Term Structure of Interest Rates: Spot, Par, and Forward Curves

as discount rates. Assume annual compounding and the following forward
rates.
вҖӢ

Tenor

Forward Rate

0y1y

1.5%

1y1y

2.5%

2y1y

3.5%
вҖӢ

Solution:
The price is 98.619.
Forward rate approach:
102

2
2
___________
	вҖӢPV = _
вҖӢвҖӢ(1.015
вҖӢ+ _________________
вҖӢвҖҜвҖҜвҖӢ.вҖӢ
)вҖӢвҖӢ+ вҖӢвҖҜвҖҜ
вҖӢ(1.015 Г— 1.025)вҖӢ вҖӢ(1.015 Г— 1.025 Г— 1.035)вҖӢ

PV = 98.6190.
The implied one-, two-, and three-year spot rates are as follows:
One-year = 1.5%.
Two-year = (1.015 Г— 1.025)(1/2) вҖ“ 1 = 1.999%.
Three-year = (1.015 Г— 1.025 Г— 1.035)(1/3) вҖ“ 1 = 2.4967%.
Using the spot prices to price the bond gives the following:
102
вҖӢ 1.024967 вҖӢ вҖӢ

	вҖӢPV = _
вҖӢ( 2 ) 1 вҖӢ+ _
вҖӢ( 2 ) 2 вҖӢ+ _
вҖӢ(
вҖӢ.вҖӢ
)3
вҖӢ 1.015 вҖӢ вҖӢ

вҖӢ 1.01999 вҖӢ вҖӢ

PV = 98.6190.
7. Demonstrate how an investor with a five-year investment horizon would
optimally decide between the two following strategies:
в– 

Buy a three-year government bond at the 3% spot rate, and then reinvest for two years at the expected future two-year rate.

в– 

Buy a five-year government bond at the 4% spot rate.

Solution:
Calculate the implied two-year forward rate in three years:
(1 + ZA)A Г— (1 + IFRA,B вҖ“ A)B вҖ“ A = (1 + ZB)B.
(1 + 0.03)3 Г— (1 + IFR3,2)2 = (1 + 0.04)5.
IFR3,2 = 5.52%
If the investor believes that the two-year rate in three years will be greater
than 5.52%, then the better strategy is to buy the three-year government
bond and reinvest at a higher rate. If the investor believes that the two-year
rate in three years will be less than 5.52%, then the five-year bond should be
purchased. The implied forward rate represents the breakeven reinvestment
rate.

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
Spot, Par, and Forward Yield Curves and Interpreting Their Relationship

SPOT, PAR, AND FORWARD YIELD CURVES AND
INTERPRETING THEIR RELATIONSHIP
compare the spot curve, par curve, and forward curve
Because spot, par, and forward rates are interconnected, so are the shapes of the spot,
par, and forward curves. This analysis is best illustrated through an example. In an
earlier lesson, we used spot rates to compute par rates and forward rates for Canadian
and Australian government bonds. We can use these rates to build yield curves across
a range of maturities, shown in Exhibit 1.

Spot, Par, and Forward Curves (Canada and Australia)
A. Spot, Par, and Forward Curves: Canadian Government Bonds
2.5
2.0
1.5
1.0
0.5
0
1

2

3

4

5

Spot

6

7

8

Par

9

10

Forward

B. Spot, Par, and Forward Curves: Australian Government Bonds
3.0
2.5
2.0
1.5
1.0
0.5
0
1

2

3
Spot

4

5

6
Par

7

8

9

Forward

10

225

4

226

Learning Module 9

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
The Term Structure of Interest Rates: Spot, Par, and Forward Curves

We can make the following general observations:
1. The spot rates are positive, and the spot curve is upward sloping.
2. The spot and par curves are nearly identical; the par rates are slightly lower
than the spot rates, and the (slight) difference between the spot and par
curves is greater at longer maturities.
3. Forward rates are greater than the spot and par rates.
These observations stem from general relationships between the shapes of the
curves. If the spot curve is upward sloping, par rates will be nearвҖ”but belowвҖ”spot
rates, particularly at the long end of the curve. This is because the low short-term
spot rates result in higher bond prices, particularly for longer-term bonds, which
results in low par rates when we do the calculation that assumes the price is 100% of
par. Forward rates being above spot rates, if the spot curve is upward sloping, follows
from the prior lesson, which established forward rates as incremental rates of return.
Exhibit 6 shows the spot, par, and forward curves if the spot curve is flat, assumed
to be 2.50% for all maturities. When the spot rate is constant across all maturities,
the par and forward rates will equate to the spot rate across all maturities as well. In
short, a flat spot rate curve reflects no expectations of changes in future interest rates;
thus forward rates equal spot rates. In this particular example, government bonds
would pay a 2.5% coupon rate, and the bonds would be priced at par value (thus, the
par rate is also 2.5%).

Exhibit 6: Flat Term Structure
3.0
2.5
2.0
1.5
1.0
0.5
0
1

2

3
Spot

4

5

6
Par

7

8

9

10

Forward

Exhibit 7 shows the spot, par, and forward curves for a downward-sloping (inverted)
spot curve or falling spot rates as maturities lengthen. Starting from a 4% 1-year spot
rate, rates fall to 1.90% for a maturity of 10 years. As in the previous examples, the par
rates are similar to the spot rates. The inverted term structure of spot rates reflects
expectations of significantly lower one-year rates in future years, and this is shown
by the forward curve. In this example, the spot rate term structure implies a one-year
rate of 0.1175% expected in nine years.

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
Spot, Par, and Forward Yield Curves and Interpreting Their Relationship

Exhibit 7: Inverted Term Structure
4.5
4.0
3.5
3.0
2.5
2.0
1.5
1.0
0.5
0
1

2

3

4

Spot

5

6

7

Par

8

9

10

Forward

We conclude with Exhibit 8, which summarizes the general relationship between the
spot, par, and forward curves for different spot curve shapes.

Exhibit 8: Spot, Par, and Forward Curve Relationship
Spot Curve Shape

Par Curve

Forward Curve

Upward Sloping

Below spot curve

Above spot curve

Flat

Equal to spot curve

Equal to spot curve

Downward Sloping (Inverted)

Above spot curve

Below spot curve

227

228

Learning Module 9

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
The Term Structure of Interest Rates: Spot, Par, and Forward Curves

QUESTION SET
1. The chart below shows a spot curve and its implied forward curve.
Identify the forward curve, and justify your choice.
5.0
4.5
4.0
3.5
3.0
2.5
2.0
1.5
1.0
0.5
0
1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

Solution:
The forward curve is represented by the line that moves from 3.0% to approximately 1.5% in Year 5 and then slopes dramatically higher from Year 5
to 6, ending at about 4.5% in Year 10.
When the spot curve is sloping downward (Years 1вҖ“5), forward rates will
be below spot rates. When the spot curve is sloping upward (Years 6вҖ“10),
forward rates will be above spot rates.
For Questions 2 and 3, refer to the spot rate data shown in Exhibit 9. It is
important to note that some bonds will trade at negative yield. This was prevalent among developed market sovereign bonds in the wake of the financial
crisis as central banks pursued accommodative monetary policy in response
to below-target inflation. Negative rates do not change the fundamental mathematics used in bond pricing.

Exhibit 9: Negative Spot Rates (Germany and Switzerland)
вҖӢ

Maturity

Germany

Switzerland

1-year

вҖ“0.6965%

вҖ“0.7882%

2-year

вҖ“0.7034%

вҖ“0.7133%

3-year

вҖ“0.7021%

вҖ“0.6435%

4-year

вҖ“0.6418%

вҖ“0.5615%

5-year

вҖ“0.5578%

вҖ“0.4757%

6-year

вҖ“0.4796%

вҖ“0.4080%

7-year

вҖ“0.4014%

вҖ“0.3402%

8-year

вҖ“0.3269%

вҖ“0.2673%

9-year

вҖ“0.2524%

вҖ“0.1945%

10-year

вҖ“0.1779%

вҖ“0.1216%

вҖӢ

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
Spot, Par, and Forward Yield Curves and Interpreting Their Relationship

2. Calculate the implied one-year forward rate in nine years in Switzerland.
Solution:

The question is requesting the 9y1y forward rate. This is calculated from the
10-year and 9-year spot rates, as follows:
(1 + ZA)A Г— (1 + IFRA,B вҖ“ A)B вҖ“ A = (1 + ZB)B
(1 + -0.001945)9 Г— (1 + IFR9,1)1 = (1 + -0.001216)10
IFR9,1 = 0.537%
Thus, the implied one-year forward rate in nine years for Swiss government
bonds is 0.537%.
3. Explain why a country with negative spot rates, such as Switzerland, may
have positive forward rates.
Solution:

As shown in earlier examples, an upward-sloping spot curve (which Switzerland has) will be characterized by forward rates that are greater than spot
rates. As the negative rates become less negative and move closer to zero,
the more likely that forward rates will be positive with an upward-sloping
spot curve.
4. The following chart shows spot and forward curves for German sovereign
bonds. Explain why the forward curve is close to identical to the spot curve
for two and three-year maturities.
1.0

0.5

0

вҖ“0.5

вҖ“1.0
1

2

3
Spot

4

5

6
Par

7

8

9

10

Forward

Solution:
In flat term structure environments, forward rates equal spot rates. The spot
rates in Germany for two and three-year maturities appear to be approximately equivalent to the one-year spot rate. Thus, GermanyвҖҷs term structure
is flat for the first three years, and forward rates should be approximately
equal to spot rates.

229

230

Learning Module 9

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
The Term Structure of Interest Rates: Spot, Par, and Forward Curves

PRACTICE PROBLEMS
The following information relates to questions
1-9
Use the spot rates provided to answer the following questions.

Government Bond Spot Rates
Maturity

Canada

Australia

Germany

Switzerland

1-year

0.3117%

0.0272%

вҖ“0.6965%

вҖ“0.7882%

2-year

0.5680%

0.0675%

вҖ“0.7034%

вҖ“0.7133%

3-year

0.7977%

0.3003%

вҖ“0.7021%

вҖ“0.6435%

4-year

0.9640%

0.5853%

вҖ“0.6418%

вҖ“0.5615%

5-year

1.1105%

0.8052%

вҖ“0.5578%

вҖ“0.4757%

6-year

1.2052%

0.9877%

вҖ“0.4796%

вҖ“0.4080%

7-year

1.2998%

1.1702%

вҖ“0.4014%

вҖ“0.3402%

8-year

1.3935%

1.2878%

вҖ“0.3269%

вҖ“0.2673%

9-year

1.4872%

1.4054%

вҖ“0.2524%

вҖ“0.1945%

10-year

1.5809%

1.5230%

вҖ“0.1779%

вҖ“0.1216%

1. Which level of coupon would the Swiss government choose if its goal is to minimize the premium over par value for a five-year debt issue?
A. 1.0%
B. 0.5%
C. 0.0%
2. The Australian government is considering issuing three-year bonds with a 3.0%
coupon with annual payments. Given the spot rates in Australia, the price is
closest to:
A. 108.05.
B. 108.07.
C. 108.69.
3. Suppose the one-year and two-year spot rates in Canada move upward by 20 bps
but the three-year Canadian spot rate remains unchanged. Which of the following best reflects the updated three-year Canadian par rate?
A. Increases by approximately 13 bps
B. Increases by approximately 7 bps
C. Increases by approximately 0.16 bps

Practice Problems

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.

4. Match the spot rates needed to calculate the corresponding implied forward
rates.
1. Two-year and five-year spot rates

A. Two-year implied forward rate in five
years

2. Two-year and seven-year spot rates

B. Three-year implied forward rate in two
years

3. Five-year and seven-year spot rates

C. Five-year implied forward rate in two
years

5. Which of the following choices is the closest to the implied five-year forward rate
in two years for Swiss government bonds?
A. вҖ“0.191%
B. вҖ“0.001%
C. вҖ“0.317%
6. Match the sequence of forward rates and the corresponding spot rate that the
forward rates will calculate.
Forward rates

Spot rate calculation

1. 0y1y x 1y1y x 2y1y

A. Four-year spot rate

2. 0y1y x 1y2y x 3y3y

B. Three-year spot rate

3. 0y1y x 1y1y x 2y1y x 3y1y

C. Six-year spot rate

7. Which of the following statements about yield curves is true?
A. Spot curves are derived from par rates.
B. Par curves are derived from forward rates.
C. Forward curves are derived from spot rates.
8. Match the following statements about forward rate curves with corresponding
statements about spot rate curves.
1. The forward rate curve lies above the spot
rate curve.

A. The spot rate curve is downward sloping
(i.e., inverted).

2. The forward rate curve lies below the spot
rate curve.

B. The spot rate curve is upward sloping (i.e.,
normal).

3. The forward rate curve is equivalent to the
spot rate curve.

C. The spot rate curve is flat across all
maturities.

9. Match the following statements about par rate curves with corresponding state-

231

232

Learning Module 9

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
The Term Structure of Interest Rates: Spot, Par, and Forward Curves

ments about spot rate curves.
1. The par rate curve lies above the spot rate
curve.

A. The spot rate curve is upward sloping (i.e.,
normal), and spot rates are negative.

2. The par rate curve lies below the spot rate
curve.

B. The spot rate curve is upward sloping (i.e.,
normal), and spot rates are positive.

3. The par rate curve is equivalent to the spot C. The spot rate curve is flat across all
rate curve.
maturities.

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.

Solutions

SOLUTIONS
1. C is correct. Given that SwitzerlandвҖҷs current five-year spot (and par) rate is negative, any non-negative coupon will cause the Swiss government to issue debt at a
premium to par. Issuance of debt without a coupon will minimize the size of the
premium.
2. B is correct.
PMT + FV

	вҖӢPV = _
вҖӢ PMT 1 вҖӢ+ _
вҖӢ PMT вҖӢ+ вӢҜ + _
вҖӢ
вҖӢ.вҖӢ
вҖӢ(1 + вҖӢZN
вҖӢ вҖӢ)вҖӢNвҖӢ
вҖӢ(1 + вҖӢZ1вҖӢ вҖӢ)вҖӢ вҖӢ вҖӢ(1 + вҖӢZ2вҖӢ вҖӢ)вҖӢ2вҖӢ
3
вҖӢ 1 + 0.000272 вҖӢ вҖӢ

3
вҖӢ 1 + 0.000675 вҖӢ вҖӢ

103
вҖӢ 1 + 0.003003 вҖӢ вҖӢ

вҖӢ+ ____________
вҖӢвҖҜвҖҜ
вҖӢ+ ____________
вҖӢвҖҜвҖҜ
вҖӢ.вҖӢ
	вҖӢPV = ____________
вҖӢвҖҜвҖҜ
(
)3
(
)1
(
)2
PV = 108.07.
3. C is correct. In Example 2, we calculated the three-year Canadian par rate. The
par rate of 0.7952% approximates the spot rate of 0.7977%, so the most important
change affecting the three-year par rate is the change in the three-year spot rate.
Because it does not change, the only change will be a slight move in the par rate
toward the spot rate (to approximately 0.7968%).
4. 1. B. By using two-year and five-year rates, the difference represents the tenor
of the implied forward rate of three years, and the shorter tenor rate reflects the
beginning of the forward in two years.
2. C. By using two-year and seven-year rates, the difference represents the tenor
of the implied forward rate of five years, and the shorter tenor rate reflects the
beginning of the forward in two years.
3. A. By using five-year and seven-year rates, the difference represents the tenor
of the implied forward rate of two years, and the shorter tenor rate reflects the
beginning of the forward in five years.
5. The correct answer is A. The implied five-year forward rate in two years is the
2y5y rate. To calculate, we use the seven-year Swiss government rate and the
two-year Swiss government rate, as follows:
2y5y IFR = [(1 вҖ“ 0.003402)7/(1 вҖ“ 0.007133)2](1/5) вҖ“ 1 = 0.191%.
Choice B represents the 5y2y implied forward rate, and Choice C represents the
2y3y implied forward rate.
6. 1. B. This is a series of three one-year forwards, thus providing the information
for a three-year spot rate.
2. C. This sequence is a one-year spot rate, followed by a two-year forward rate in
one year, followed by a three-year forward rate in three years.
3. A. This sequence is a series of four one-year forwards.
7. The correct answer is C. The forward rates used to construct forward curves are
derived from spot rates. Statement A is not true, because par rates are derived
from spot rates. Statement B is not true, because par curves are derived from
spot rates.
8. 1. B. In a normal interest rate environment with an upward-sloping yield curve,
forward interest rates will be greater than their corresponding spot rates across

233

234

Learning Module 9

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
The Term Structure of Interest Rates: Spot, Par, and Forward Curves

all maturities.
2. A. In an inverted spot rate environment, forward interest rates will be below
their corresponding spot rates.
3. C. A flat maturity structure of interest rates is sometimes assumed. In such an
environment in which spot rates are constant, this implies that future expectations are for interest rates to remain at a constant level. Thus, forward rates equal
spot rates in a flat term structure environment.
9. 1. A. This situation is illustrated in the German and Swiss government interest
rate data in which spot rates are negative while the spot rate curve is upward
sloping. In such instances, par rates lie above spot rates.
2. B. This situation is illustrated in the Canadian and Australian government
interest rate data in which spot rates are positive and the spot curve is normal.
3. C. This is a hypothetical case but can be seen by creating a flat spot rate curve.

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.

LEARNING MODULE

10

Interest Rate Risk and Return
LEARNING OUTCOMES
Mastery

The candidate should be able to:
calculate and interpret the sources of return from investing in a
fixed-rate bond;
describe the relationships among a bondвҖҷs holding period return, its
Macaulay duration, and the investment horizon;
define, calculate, and interpret Macaulay duration.

INTRODUCTION
Prior lessons on yield measures established that a fixed-income investorвҖҷs rate of
return will equal a bondвҖҷs yield-to-maturity (YTM) under certain assumptions. In
these lessons, we explore the sources of return for fixed-income investments and
demonstrate investment returns in different scenarios, including the one embedded in
the YTM calculations. Prior lessons also established interest rate risk. We show how
investment horizon, in relation to a bondвҖҷs features, is a key determinant of interest
rate risk for investors and how different investors in the same fixed-income investment can have different returns and views on risk. Finally, we introduce Macaulay
duration, a weighted-average measure of the time to receipt for a bondвҖҷs cash flows,
and demonstrate how holding a bond for its Macaulay duration balances reinvestment
and price risks.
LEARNING MODULE OVERVIEW
в– 

There are three sources of return for fixed-rate bond investors: (1) coupon and principal payments, (2) reinvestment of
coupons, and (3) gain or loss on the sale of the bond if the bond is sold
prior to maturity.

в– 

The rate of return on a fixed-rate bond investment is found by using
the holding period, the future value of coupons received, the sale price,
and the purchase price to calculate a compounded, annualized rate of
return.

1

236

Learning Module 10

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
Interest Rate Risk and Return

в– 

If all cash flows are received at scheduled dates, coupons are reinvested at the same rate as a bondвҖҷs YTM, and the bond is held to
maturity, an investorвҖҷs annualized compounded rate of return will
equal the bondвҖҷs YTM. If any of those assumptions do not hold, the
investorвҖҷs rate of return will vary.

в– 

Reinvestment risk and price risk are types of interest rate risk and have
an inverse relationship. Reinvestment risk is the risk of decreasing
reinvestment returns on cash flows, which occurs when interest rates
fall. Price risk refers to declining prices and occurs when interest rates
rise.

в– 

The longer the investment horizon, the more important reinvestment
risk is relative to price risk. If an investorвҖҷs investment horizon equals
the Macaulay duration of a bond, the risks equally offset each other.

в– 

Macaulay duration is the weighted-average time to receipt of a bondвҖҷs
cash flows, where the weights of each cash flow in the calculation are
each cash flowвҖҷs share of the bondвҖҷs full price (i.e., present value).

в– 

When the investment horizon is greater than (less than, equal to) a
bondвҖҷs Macaulay duration, coupon reinvestment risk is higher than
(lower than, equal to) the bondвҖҷs price risk.

LEARNING MODULE SELF-ASSESSMENT
These initial questions are intended to help you gauge your current level
of understanding of the learning module.
1. A source of risk for a buy-and-hold fixed-income investor, ignoring credit
risk, is from:
A. capital gain/loss on sale only.
B. coupon reinvestment only.
C. neither capital gain/loss on sale nor coupon reinvestment.
Solution:
B is correct. Changes in interest rates during the holding period of the bond
will impact returns from reinvestment of coupons.
A is incorrect because for a buy-and-hold investor, there is no risk of capital
gain or loss since the investor is not selling the bond prior to maturity and
will get the par value of the bond at the maturity date.
C is incorrect because a buy-and-hold investorвҖҷs returns are impacted by the
rate earned on the reinvestment of coupons, or reinvestment risk.
2. A family office purchases a six-year, 5.8% annual coupon eurobond priced at
par for settlement on 15 December 2031. The bond matures on 15 December 2037. Immediately after the purchase of the bond, interest rates rise to
6.5%. The family office sells the bond after three years. The family officeвҖҷs
total annualized return on the investment was closest to:
A. 5.28%.
B. 5.80%.

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.

Introduction

C. 6.50%.
Solution:
A is correct. The total annualized return is composed of the (1) coupon
payments, (2) reinvestment of coupons, and (3) gain/loss on the sale. This is
equal to 5.28%, as shown below.
The future value of the coupons including reinvestment is
= вҖ“FV(0.065, 3, 5.8, 0, 0) = 18.556.
The sale price of the bond after three years is
= вҖ“PV(0.065, 3, 5.8, 100, 0) = 98.146.
The realized return, r, is
1
_
FV вҖӢT вҖӢ

	вҖӢr = вҖӢ(_
вҖӢPV вҖӢ)вҖӢ вҖӢвҲ’ 1.вҖӢ
1
_
18.556 + 98.146 вҖӢ3 вҖӢ

вҖӢвҖҜвҖҜ
вҖӢ вҖӢ вҖӢвҲ’ 1.вҖӢ
	вҖӢr = вҖӢ(____________
)
100
r=0.0528=5.28%
B is incorrect because it would be the return if interest rates remained at
5.8%.
C is incorrect because 6.5% is the interest rate at which the coupons will be
reinvested, not the rate of return for the family office on the investment.
3. The risk to an investor who buys a bond at par value and intends to sell it
before the receipt of the first coupon payment, ignoring credit risk, is most
likely from:
A. price risk.
B. reinvestment risk.
C. neither price risk nor reinvestment risk.
Solution:
A is correct. Changes in interest rates can affect the price of the bond and,
therefore, the returns for the investor.
B is incorrect because if the investor intends to sell the bond before the
receipt of the first coupon, then reinvestment risk is irrelevant because no
coupons will be reinvested.
C is incorrect because the investor faces price risk.
4. Reinvestment risk and price risk of a bond offset one another if an investorвҖҷs
investment horizon is:
A. equal to the bondвҖҷs time-to-maturity.
B. equal to the bondвҖҷs Macaulay duration.
C. less than the bondвҖҷs Macaulay duration.
Solution:
B is correct. When the investment horizon is equal to the Macaulay duration, the gain (loss) from coupon reinvestment is offset by the loss (gain) in
the price of the bond from changes in interest rates.
A is incorrect because if an investor holds a bond to maturity (ignoring
credit risk), the investor faces no price risk but does face reinvestment risk.
Therefore, reinvestment risk will dominate price risk.

237

238

Learning Module 10

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
Interest Rate Risk and Return

C is incorrect because if the investment horizon is less than the Macaulay
duration, price risk dominates reinvestment risk.
5. Hightest Capital purchases a 15-year, 6.8% annual coupon bond and has an
investment horizon of 7.0 years. The Macaulay duration of the bond is 9.85
years. The duration gap at the time of purchase is closest to:
A. 2.85.
B. 5.15.
C. 8.00.
Solution:
A is correct. The duration gap for a bond is the difference between its Macaulay duration and the investorвҖҷs investment horizon: 9.85 вҖ“ 7.0 = 2.85.
B is incorrect because it is the difference between the bondвҖҷs maturity and
its Macaulay duration (15 вҖ“ 9.85 = 5.15).
C is incorrect because it is the difference between the bondвҖҷs maturity and
the investorвҖҷs investment horizon (15 вҖ“ 7 = 8.00).
6. Consider a bond that has two years remaining to maturity, a coupon of 4%
paid semiannually, and a yield-to-maturity of 4.60%. Assuming it is 63 days
into the first coupon period and a 30/360 basis, the bondвҖҷs annualized Macaulay duration is closest to:
A. 0.9419 years.
B. 1.7666 years.
C. 1.9416 years.
Solution:
B is correct.
вҖӢ

Time to
Receipt

Cash Flow

PV

Weight

Time to
Receipt Г—
Weight

1.0000

0.6500

2.0000

1.9707

0.0198

0.0129

2.0000

1.6500

2.0000

1.9264

0.0193

0.0319

Period

3.0000

2.6500

2.0000

1.8830

0.0189

0.0501

4.0000

3.6500

102.0000

93.8759

0.9420

3.4383

99.6559

1.0000

3.5331

Annualized
MacDur

1.7666

вҖӢ

The first cash flowвҖҷs time-to-receipt is (180-63)/180 = 0.65 periods from now
as it is 63 days into the period. Each subsequent cash flow is received one
period later after the first, so time-to-receipt = 0.65 + 1, 0.65 + 2, and so on.
7. Consider a bond that has five years remaining to maturity, a coupon of 0%
paid annually, and a yield-to-maturity of вҖ“0.38%. Assuming it is the issuance
date and a 30/360 basis, the bondвҖҷs annualized Macaulay duration is closest
to:
A. 3.5361 years.
B. 5.0000 years.

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
Sources of Return from Investing in a Fixed-Rate Bond

239

C. 6.3412 years.
Solution:
B is correct. No calculation is required, because the Macaulay duration of a
zero-coupon bond is its time-to-maturity unless it is between coupon dates.
To demonstrate, however, see the following table:
вҖӢ

Period

Time to
Receipt

Cash Flow

PV

Weight

Time to
Receipt Г—
Weight

1.0000

1.0000

0.0000

0.0000

0.0000

0.0000

2.0000

2.0000

0.0000

0.0000

0.0000

0.0000

3.0000

3.0000

0.0000

0.0000

0.0000

0.0000

4.0000

4.0000

0.0000

0.0000

0.0000

0.0000

5.0000

5.0000

100.0000

100.9554

1.0000

5.0000

100.9554

1.0000

5.0000

вҖӢ

SOURCES OF RETURN FROM INVESTING IN A
FIXED-RATE BOND
calculate and interpret the sources of return from investing in a
fixed-rate bond;
Fixed-rate bond investors have three sources of return: (1) receipt of promised coupon
and principal payments on the scheduled dates, (2) reinvestment of coupon payments,
and (3) potential capital gains or losses on the sale of the bond prior to maturity. We
now focus on how interest rate changes affect the reinvestment of coupon payments
and a bondвҖҷs market price if sold prior to maturity.
We start with two investors buying BRWAвҖҷs new 10-year, 6.2% (annual) coupon
eurobond, but each investor has a different time horizon for holding it. Initially, interest rates are unchanged. Then, we demonstrate the impact of higher interest rates on
investorsвҖҷ total return. Finally, we show the effect of lower interest rates.
EXAMPLE 1
The first investor, Viswan Family Office (VFO), is a вҖңbuy-and-holdвҖқ investor,
purchasing BRWAвҖҷs new 10-year, 6.2% (annual) coupon eurobond priced at
par (settlement: 15 October 2025; maturity: 15 October 2035) and holds it to
maturity. If the coupon payments are reinvested at 6.2%, the yield-to-maturity,
the future value of the coupons on the bondвҖҷs maturity date, is found using
Microsoft ExcelвҖҷs FV function:
= -FV(Rate, Nper, Pmt, Pv, Type),
where Type indicates payment at the end (0) or beginning (1) of the period. For
this bond,
= -FV(0.062, 10, 6.2, 0, 0) = 82.493 per 100 of par value.

2

240

Learning Module 10

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
Interest Rate Risk and Return

While 62 (= 6.2 Г— 10) in total coupons is received, the excess amount,
20.493 (= 82.493 вҖ“ 62), is the вҖңinterest-on-interestвҖқ gain from reinvesting and
compounding. The investorвҖҷs rate of return, expressed as a compound annual
growth rate, is 6.20%.
1
_

FV вҖӢT вҖӢ
	вҖӢr = вҖӢ(_
вҖӢPV вҖӢ)вҖӢ вҖӢвҲ’ 1.вҖӢ
1
_
82.493 + 100 вҖӢ10 вҖӢ

вҖӢ 100
вҖӢ)вҖӢ вҖӢвҲ’ 1.вҖӢ
	вҖӢr = вҖӢ(_
r = 0.0620 = 6.20%.
Example 1 demonstrates that yield-to-maturity at the time of purchase equals the
investorвҖҷs rate of return under three assumptions: (1) the investor holds the bond to
maturity, (2) there is no default by the issuer, and (3) the coupon interest payments
are reinvested at that same rate of interest.
Example 2 considers the second investor, Baywhite Financial (Baywhite), which also
buys the 10-year, 6.2% annual coupon payment bond and pays the same price. However,
Baywhite has a four-year investment horizon, so coupon interest is reinvested for four
years, and the bond is sold immediately after receiving the fourth coupon payment.
EXAMPLE 2
Baywhite buys BRWAвҖҷs 10-year, 6.2% eurobond but sells after four years. If the
coupon payments are reinvested at 6.2% for four years, the future value of the
reinvested coupons is 27.20321 per 100 of par value.
= вҲ’FV(0.062, 4, 6.2, 0, 0) = 27.203.
Interest-on-interest gain from reinvesting and compounding is 2.403 (=
27.203 вҖ“ 24.800). When the bond is sold, it has six years remaining to maturity.
Assuming yield-to-maturity remains 6.2%, the sale price is still 100% of par.
BaywhiteвҖҷs annualized rate of return is 6.20%:
1
_
FV вҖӢT вҖӢ

	вҖӢr = вҖӢ(_
вҖӢPV вҖӢ)вҖӢ вҖӢвҲ’ 1.вҖӢ
1
_
27.203 + 100 вҖӢ4 вҖӢ

вҖӢ 100
вҖӢ)вҖӢ вҖӢвҲ’ 1.вҖӢ
	вҖӢr = вҖӢ(_
r = 0.0620 = 6.20%.
Horizon yield is an investorвҖҷs IRR based on the total return (reinvested coupon
payments plus sale price or redemption amount) and the purchase price of the bond.
The horizon yield on a bond investment is the annualized holding-period rate of return.
In Example 2, BaywhiteвҖҷs horizon yield is 6.2%, which matches the original
yield-to-maturity even though Baywhite did not hold the bond until maturity. This
example shows that the realized horizon yield matches the original yield-to-maturity
if (1) coupon payments are reinvested at the same interest rate as the original
yield-to-maturity and (2) the bond is sold at a price on the constant-yield price trajectory, implying there is no capital gain or loss when the bond is sold. Importantly,
capital gains (losses) arise if a bond is sold at a price above (below) its constant-yield
price trajectory, as shown in a prior lesson.

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
Sources of Return from Investing in a Fixed-Rate Bond

A point on the trajectory represents the carrying value of the bond at that time.
The carrying value is the purchase price plus (minus) the amortized amount of the
discount (premium) if the bond is purchased at a price below (above) par value. The
constant-yield price trajectory for the investors in Example 1 and Example 2 is a flat
curve at a price of 100 as the bonds were purchased and sold at par.
We now demonstrate the impact of higher interest rates on VFO and Baywhite by
increasing interest rates by 100 basis points (bps) immediately after investment. The
yield on the bond increases from 6.20% to 7.20%, and coupon reinvestment rates go
up by 100 bps as well.
EXAMPLE 3
VFO, the buy-and-hold investor, purchases BRWAвҖҷs new 10-year, 6.2% (annual)
coupon eurobond at par, and then interest rates immediately increase to 7.20%.
The future value of the reinvested coupons at 7.20% for 10 years is
= вҲ’FV(0.072, 10, 6.2, 0, 0) = 86.475.
And VFOвҖҷs realized rate of return (horizon yield) is 6.43%:
1
_
FV вҖӢT вҖӢ

	вҖӢr = вҖӢ(_
вҖӢPV вҖӢ)вҖӢ вҖӢвҲ’ 1.вҖӢ
1
_
86.475 + 100 вҖӢ10 вҖӢ

вҖӢ 100
вҖӢ)вҖӢ вҖӢвҲ’ 1.вҖӢ
	вҖӢr = вҖӢ(_
r = 0.0643 = 6.43%.
VFO benefits from the higher coupon reinvestment rate. The realized horizon
yield is 6.43%, 23 bps higher than the outcome in Example 1, when interest rates were
constant. Importantly, VFO does not incur a capital gain or loss because it holds the
bond until maturity.
EXAMPLE 4
Baywhite buys the same BRWA eurobond at par, interest rates immediately rise
to 7.2%, and it sells the bonds four years later. The future value of the reinvested
coupons at 7.2% is
= -FV(0.072, 4, 6.2, 0, 0) = 27.609.
We must also calculate the sale price of the bond because the change in
interest rates affects the bondвҖҷs price and, unlike VFO, Baywhite is selling it
before maturity. We calculate the sale price after four years as
= вҖ“PV(0.072, 6, 6.2, 100, 0) = 95.263,
resulting in a realized four-year horizon yield of 5.28%:
1
_
FV вҖӢT вҖӢ

	вҖӢr = вҖӢ(_
вҖӢPV вҖӢ)вҖӢ вҖӢвҲ’ 1.вҖӢ
1
_
27.609 + 95.263 вҖӢ4 вҖӢ

вҖӢвҖҜвҖҜ
вҖӢ)вҖӢ вҖӢвҲ’ 1.вҖӢ
	вҖӢr = вҖӢ(____________
100
r = 0.0528 = 5.28%.

241

242

Learning Module 10

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
Interest Rate Risk and Return

While Baywhite also benefits from the higher coupon reinvestment rate, it is more
than offset by the capital loss from the sale of the bonds at the higher yield (lower
price). Thus, BaywhiteвҖҷs rate of return is lower than in Example 2, where the interest
rate remained at 6.2%.
We now examine the rates of return for these two investors if interest rates decline
by 100 bps; the yield on the BRWA bonds fall from 6.20% to 5.20% immediately after
they are purchased.
KNOWLEDGE CHECK
Immediately after VFO, the buy-and-hold investor, purchases BRWAвҖҷs
10-year eurobonds at par, interest rates fall to 5.20%.
1. Calculate the future value of reinvested coupons.
Solution:

The future value of reinvesting the coupon payments at 5.20% for 10 years is
= вҲ’FV(0.052, 10, 6.2, 0, 0) = 78.715.
2. Calculate VFOвҖҷs horizon yield (realized rate of return).
Solution:

VFOвҖҷs horizon yield is 5.98%:
1
_
FV вҖӢT вҖӢ

	вҖӢr = вҖӢ(_
вҖӢPV вҖӢ)вҖӢ вҖӢвҲ’ 1.вҖӢ
1
_
78.715 + 100 вҖӢ10 вҖӢ

вҖӢ 100
вҖӢ)вҖӢ вҖӢвҲ’ 1.вҖӢ
	вҖӢr = вҖӢ(_
r = 0.0598 = 5.98%.
3. Contrast VFOвҖҷs investment outcome in this scenario to Example 1 and Example 3.
Solution:

VFO suffers from the lower coupon reinvestment rate. The realized horizon
yield of 5.98% is 22 bps lower than the result in Example 1, when interest
rates were unchanged, and 45 bps lower than the result in Example 3. There
is no capital gain or loss, because the bonds are held until maturity. VFOвҖҷs
experience indicates that interest rate risk for a buy-and-hold investor arises
entirely from reinvestment risk.
Baywhite buys BRWAвҖҷs 10-year Eurobonds at par, and interest rates fall immediately to 5.20%. Baywhite sells the bonds after four years.
4. Calculate the future value of the reinvested coupons.
Solution:

The future of the reinvested coupons is
= вҖ“FV(0.052, 4, 6.2, 0, 0) = 26.802.

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
Sources of Return from Investing in a Fixed-Rate Bond

5. Calculate BaywhiteвҖҷs horizon yield (realized rate of return).
Solution:

The sale price of the bond after four years is
= вҖ“PV(0.052, 6, 6.2, 100, 0) = 105.043,
resulting in a realized four-year horizon yield of 7.16%:
1
_
FV вҖӢT вҖӢ

	вҖӢr = вҖӢ(_
вҖӢPV вҖӢ)вҖӢ вҖӢвҲ’ 1.вҖӢ
1
_
26.802 + 105.043 вҖӢ4 вҖӢ

	вҖӢr = вҖӢ(_____________
вҖӢвҖҜвҖҜ
вҖӢ вҖӢ вҖӢвҲ’ 1.вҖӢ
)
100
r = 0.0716 = 7.16%
6. Contrast BaywhiteвҖҷs investment outcome in this scenario to Example 2 and
Example 4.
Solution:

The reduction in the future value of the coupons is more than offset by BaywhiteвҖҷs capital gain from the sale. Consequently, BaywhiteвҖҷs horizon yield is
higher than in both Example 2 and Example 4.
As just demonstrated, interest income is the return associated with the passage of
time, so it includes the receipt of coupon interest, the reinvestment of those coupons,
and the amortization of the discount (or premium) from purchase at a price below (or
above) par value to realign the return with the market discount rate. A capital gain
or loss is the investorвҖҷs return associated with the change in the value of the security,
which for a fixed-rate bond arises from a change in the yield-to-maturity (i.e., the
implied market discount rate).
This series of examples illustrates an important point about fixed-rate bonds: an
investorвҖҷs investment horizon is at the heart of understanding interest rate risk and
return. There are two offsetting types of interest rate risk that affect the bond investor:
reinvestment risk and price risk. The future value of reinvested coupon payments
increases when interest rates rise and decreases when rates fall. The sale price on
a bond that matures after the horizon date decreases when interest rates rise and
increases when rates fall.
Reinvestment risk matters more when the investor has a long-term investment
horizon. A buy-and-hold investor only has reinvestment risk. Price risk matters
more when the investor has a short-term investment horizon. An investor who sells
before the first coupon is received has only price risk. Thus, two investors holding
the same bond can have different exposures to interest rate risk if they have different
investment horizons.
QUESTION SET
1. Fill in the blanks using the two words below:
Reinvestment risk
Price risk

243

244

Learning Module 10

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
Interest Rate Risk and Return

An investor who has a long-term investment horizon is more concerned
about _____________, while the investor with a short-term investment horizon is more concerned about ____________.
Solution:

An investor who has a long-term investment horizon is more concerned
about reinvestment risk, while the investor with a short-term investment
horizon is more concerned about price risk.
2. What is the carrying value of a bond?
Solution:

The carrying value of a bond is the total value of the price at which the bond
was purchased plus (minus) the adjustment for amortization of the discount
(premium) if the bond is purchased at a price below (above) par value.
3. Match the following
вҖӢ

Future value of coupons

Interest rates

A. Increase

Decrease

B. Decrease

Increase
вҖӢ

Solution:
The answer to A is increase. The future value of coupons has a direct relationship with interest rates. Rising interest rates mean coupons are reinvested at a higher rate, increasing their future value.
The answer to B is decrease. The future value of coupons has a direct relationship with interest rates. Falling interest rates mean coupons are reinvested at a lower rate, decreasing their future value.
4. An investor purchases a five-year, 5.6% (annual) coupon priced at par (settlement: 15 December 2031; maturity: 15 December 2036) and sells it after
two years. Immediately after the purchase of the bond, interest rates rise to
5.9%. The investorвҖҷs total return at the end of two years is closest to:
A. 5.23%.
B. 5.60%.
C. 5.75%.
Solution:
A is correct. The investorвҖҷs total return is composed of the (1) coupons, (2)
reinvestment of coupons, and (3) gain/loss on sale prior to maturity.
The future value of the coupons assuming reinvestment at 5.90% is
= вҖ“FV(0.059, 2, 5.6, 0, 0) = 11.5304.
The sale price of the bond after two years, when three years remain to maturity, is
= вҖ“PV(0.059, 3, 5.6, 100, 0) = 99.1966.
The realized rate of return is 5.23%:
1
_
FV вҖӢT вҖӢ

	вҖӢr = вҖӢ(_
вҖӢPV вҖӢ)вҖӢ вҖӢвҲ’ 1.вҖӢ

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
Investment Horizon and Interest Rate Risk

245

1
_

11.530 + 99.197 вҖӢ2 вҖӢ
	вҖӢr = вҖӢ(____________
вҖӢвҖҜвҖҜ
вҖӢ)вҖӢ вҖӢвҲ’ 1.вҖӢ
100

r = 0.0523 = 5.23%.
B is incorrect because it is the rate of return if interest rates remain at 5.60%.
C is incorrect because it is the average of the two rates (i.e., the coupon rate,
5.6%, and the new, higher interest rate, 5.9%).
5. An investor purchases a seven-year, 6.7% (annual) coupon eurobond priced
at par (settlement: 15 December 2031; maturity: 15 December 2038) and
sells it after four years. Immediately after the purchase of the bond, interest
rates fall to 6.3%. The investorвҖҷs annualized rate of return at the end of four
years is closest to:
A. 6.50%.
B. 6.66%.
C. 6.89%.
Solution:
C is correct. The future value of the coupon and its reinvestment at 6.30% is
= вҖ“FV(0.063, 4, 6.7, 0, 0) = 29.441.
The sale price of the bond after four years is
= вҖ“PV(0.063, 3, 6.7, 100, 0) = 101.063.
The investorвҖҷs rate of return is 6.89%:
1
_

FV вҖӢT вҖӢ
вҖӢPV вҖӢ)вҖӢ вҖӢвҲ’ 1.вҖӢ
	вҖӢr = вҖӢ(_
1
_
29.441 + 101.063 вҖӢ4 вҖӢ

вҖӢвҖҜвҖҜ
вҖӢ вҖӢ вҖӢвҲ’ 1.вҖӢ
	вҖӢr = вҖӢ(_____________
)
100
r= 0.0689 = 6.89%.
A is incorrect because this is the average of the annual coupon rate and the
prevailing interest rate.
B is incorrect because this calculation does not account for the appreciation
in the bond price after interest rates fall.

INVESTMENT HORIZON AND INTEREST RATE RISK
describe the relationships among a bondвҖҷs holding period return, its
Macaulay duration, and the investment horizon;
define, calculate, and interpret Macaulay duration.
We now extend the prior discussion by introducing a third investor in BRWAвҖҷs 10-year,
6.2% annual eurobonds: Hightest Capital, which has an 8-year time horizon. If interest
rates remain at 6.20%, the future value of reinvested coupon interest is
= вҖ“FV(0.062, 8, 6.2, 0, 0) = 61.807.

3

246

Learning Module 10

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
Interest Rate Risk and Return

When the bond is sold, it has two years remaining to maturity. Assuming
yield-to-maturity remains at 6.2% and the sale price is 100, HightestвҖҷs horizon yield
(realized rate of return) is 6.20%:
1
_
FV вҖӢT вҖӢ

	вҖӢr = вҖӢ(_
вҖӢPV вҖӢ)вҖӢ вҖӢвҲ’ 1.вҖӢ
1
_

61.807 + 100 вҖӢ8 вҖӢ
вҖӢ 100
вҖӢ)вҖӢ вҖӢвҲ’ 1.вҖӢ
	вҖӢr = вҖӢ(_

r = 0.0620 = 6.20%.
If interest rates immediately rose to 7.20% after the purchase, the future value of
coupons would increase:
= вҖ“FV(0.072, 8, 6.2, 0, 0) = 64.071.
And the price of the bond at the time of sale would fall:
= вҖ“PV(0.072, 2, 6.2, 100, 0) = 98.197.
HightestвҖҷs realized eight-year horizon yield is now 6.24%:
1
_
FV вҖӢT вҖӢ

вҖӢPV вҖӢ)вҖӢ вҖӢвҲ’ 1.вҖӢ
	вҖӢr = (
вҖӢ_
1
_
64.071 + 98.197 вҖӢ8 вҖӢ

вҖӢвҖҜвҖҜ
вҖӢ вҖӢ вҖӢвҲ’ 1.вҖӢ
	вҖӢr = вҖӢ(____________
)
100
r = 0.0624 = 6.24%.
Notice that the capital loss from the bond sale of 1.803 (= 98.197 вҖ“ 100.00) is roughly
matched by the additional coupon reinvestment income of 2.265 from the increase
in interest rates. Therefore, HightestвҖҷs total return is nearly the same as in the stable
rate scenario (6.24%, compared with 6.20%).
Now assume instead that market interest rates fall by 100 bps, to 5.20%. The future
value of coupons decreases while the price of the bond at the time of sale increases:
= вҖ“FV(0.052, 8, 6.2, 0, 0) = 59.630.
= вҖ“PV(0.052, 2, 6.2, 100, 0) = 101.854.
HightestвҖҷs realized eight-year horizon yield is now 6.17%:
1
_
FV вҖӢT вҖӢ

	вҖӢr = вҖӢ(_
вҖӢPV вҖӢ)вҖӢ вҖӢвҲ’ 1.вҖӢ
1
_
59.630 + 101.854 вҖӢ8 вҖӢ

вҖӢвҖҜвҖҜ
вҖӢ вҖӢ вҖӢвҲ’ 1.вҖӢ
	вҖӢr = вҖӢ(_____________
)
100
r = 0.0617 = 6.17%.
Notice that the capital gain from the bond sale of 1.854 is roughly matched by the
decrease in coupon reinvestment income. Again, HightestвҖҷs total return is nearly the
same as in the stable rate scenario (6.17%, compared to 6.20%).
HightestвҖҷs investment results, along with those of VFO and Baywhite, are summarized in Exhibit 1. They reveal an important outcome for Hightest with the eight-year
horizon: Total returns and horizon yields are nearly the same regardless of interest rates.

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
Investment Horizon and Interest Rate Risk

Exhibit 1
Investors' Horizon Yields on BRWA's 10-Year Bonds
8%
7%

Bond YTM

Horizon yields

6%
5%
4%
3%
2%
1%
0%

Rates stable
at 6.20%

VFO (buy and hold)

Rates rise by 100 bps
to 7.20%
Baywhite (sells after 4 years)

Rates fall by 100 bps
to 5.20%
Hightest (sells after 8 years)

HightestвҖҷs investment horizon of eight years was chosen to illustrate an important
quantity for the BRWA bond and fixed-income instruments generally: Macaulay
duration, a holding period for a bond that balances coupon reinvestment gain (loss)
and price loss (gain) for a one-time instantaneous вҖңparallelвҖқ shift in the yield curve
once the bond purchase is settled. It is named after Frederick Macaulay, the Canadian
economist who introduced the concept in 1938. Given the result for Hightest, we know
that the Macaulay duration of this BRWA bond is close to eight years.
Exhibit 2 illustrates Macaulay duration for a bond initially priced at par value.

247

248

Learning Module 10

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
Interest Rate Risk and Return

Exhibit 2: Interest Rate Risk, Macaulay Duration, and Investment Horizon
A. Interest rates rise

Gains

Initial date

Gain on the future value
of reinvested coupons

Macaulay duration
Maturity
date

Losses
Loss on the sale of the bond

B. Interest rates fall
Gains

Losses

Gain on the sale of the bond

Loss on the future value
of reinvested coupons
Macaulay
duration

As shown in Panel A, when interest rates rise, there is an immediate drop in price.
Then, as time passes, the bond price is вҖңpulled to par.вҖқ The increase in the future
value of reinvested coupons starts small but builds over time, and the curve indicates
the added future value of reinvested coupons due to the higher interest rate. At the
Macaulay duration, the two effects offset each other: the gain on reinvested coupons
is equal to the loss from the increase in interest rates.
The same pattern is shown in Panel B, when interest rates fall. There is an immediate increase in price, but then the вҖңpull-to-parвҖқ effect brings the price down as
time passes. The impact from reinvesting at a lower rate starts small but becomes
significant over time. Again, the Macaulay duration indicates the point when the two
effects offset each other, so the gain from the decrease in interest rates equally offsets
the loss from coupon reinvestment at lower rates.
The foregoing discussion allows for statements about the general relationships
among interest rate risk, the Macaulay duration, and the investment horizon shown
in Exhibit 3:

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
Investment Horizon and Interest Rate Risk

Exhibit 3: Macaulay Duration, Investment Horizon, and Interest Rate Risk

Dominant Risk

Source of Interest Rate
Risk

Investment Horizon > Macaulay
Duration

Reinvestment Risk

Falling Interest Rates

Investment Horizon = Macaulay
Duration

Price Risk = Reinvestment
Risk

вҖ”

Investment Horizon < Macaulay
Duration

Price Risk

Rising Interest Rates

The Macaulay duration of the BRWA bond is 7.7429 years (the calculation will be
demonstrated in the next lesson). So, Statement 1 reflects VFOвҖҷs situation with its
10-year horizon; Statement 2, Hightest, the investor with the 8-year horizon; and
Statement 3, Baywhite, the investor with the 4-year horizon.
As shown in Equation 1, the duration gap for a bond is the difference between
its Macaulay duration and the investorвҖҷs investment horizon.
Duration gap = Macaulay duration вҖ“ Investment horizon.

(1)

VFO, with a 10-year horizon, has a negative duration gap. Therefore, the primary risk
it faces is lower interest rates. Hightest, with the eight-year horizon, has a duration
gap of approximately zero, so it is nearly hedged against interest rate risk. Baywhite,
with the four-year horizon, has a positive duration gap and is at risk of higher rates.
Importantly, as time passes, the investment horizon is reduced and the Macaulay
duration of the bond also falls.
KNOWLEDGE CHECK
Three investors, Rook Point Investors, Fyleton Investments, and Amy
Investments, purchase a 5.61%, 30-year Romanian eurobond at par
value. The bondвҖҷs Macaulay duration is 15.16 years. Rook PointвҖҷs investment
horizon is five years, while Fyleton and Amy have investment horizons of 15
and 30 years, respectively.
1. Calculate the returns for the three investors for three scenarios:
Scenario 1: Interest rates fall by 50 bps immediately after the purchase.
Scenario 2: Interest rates stay stable at 5.61%.
Scenario 3: Interest rates rise by 50 bps immediately after the purchase.
Solution:

The total returns under the various scenarios for each investor are shown in
the table below.
The key point to note is that when an investorвҖҷs investment horizon is
almost equal to the bondвҖҷs Macaulay duration, the returns under various interest rate scenarios remain the same. The gain (loss) from coupon reinvestment risk is offset by the loss (gain) from the price risk.

249

250

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
Interest Rate Risk and Return

Learning Module 10

вҖӢ

Rates Stable at 5.61%
Rook Point

Fyleton

Rates Rise to 6.11%
Amy

Rook Point

Investment Horizon

Fyleton

Rates Fall to 5.11%
Amy

Rook Point

Investment Horizon

Fyleton

Amy

Investment Horizon

5

15

30

5

15

30

5

15

30

MacDur >
Horizon

MacDur вү…
Horizon

MacDur <
Horizon

MacDur >
Horizon

MacDur вү…
Horizon

MacDur <
Horizon

MacDur >
Horizon

MacDur вү…
Horizon

MacDur <
Horizon

Future Value of Coupons
31.379

126.765

Future Value of Coupons

414.223

Redemption Value or Sale Price
100.000

100.000

31.694

131.678

5.610%

452.199

31.067

Redemption Value or Sale Price

100.000

93.675

5.610%

4.626%

95.179

Horizon Yield
5.610%

Future Value of Coupons

100.000

106.970

5.861%

6.659%

Horizon Yield
5.613%

122.063

379.840

Redemption Value or Sale Price
105.152

100.000

Horizon Yield
5.624%

5.367%
вҖӢ

QUESTION SET
1. Match the following:
вҖӢ

Duration Gap

Risk Source

A. Negative

Rising interest rates

B. Positive

Falling interest rates
вҖӢ

Solution:
The answer to A is falling interest rates. A negative duration gap means that
the bondвҖҷs Macaulay duration is lower than the investorвҖҷs investment horizon, which means that reinvestment risk is the dominant source of interest
rate risk, from falling interest rates.
The answer to B is rising interest rates. A positive duration gap means that
the bondвҖҷs Macaulay duration is higher than the investorвҖҷs investment horizon, which means that price risk is the dominant source of interest rate risk,
from rising interest rates.
2. Complete the equation below with the following terms:
Macaulay duration
Investment horizon
Time-to-maturity
Duration gap = __________ вҖ“ __________.
Solution:

Duration gap = Macaulay duration вҖ“ Investment horizon.

Macaulay Duration

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.

251

3. An investor intends to hold a bond with eight years remaining to maturity
for eight years. The bondвҖҷs Macaulay duration is 6.841. The investor is primarily exposed to which of the following interest rate risks:
A. Price risk
B. Reinvestment risk
C. Neither price nor reinvestment risk
Solution:
B is correct. A buy-and-hold investor is not exposed to price risk, because
she does not intend to sell the bond prior to maturity. However, her rate of
return is impacted by the rate at which she can reinvest coupons.
Alternatively, the investorвҖҷs investment horizon is eight years, whereas the
bondвҖҷs Macaulay duration is 6.841. When the investment horizon exceeds
the Macaulay duration, reinvestment risk dominates.

4

MACAULAY DURATION
define, calculate, and interpret Macaulay duration.
The prior lesson established Macaulay duration as a holding period for a bond that
balances reinvestment and price risk. We now turn to its calculation.
The most straightforward way to understand the Macaulay duration of a traditional
fixed-rate bond is that it is the weighted average of the time to receipt of the bondвҖҷs
cash flows, where the weights of each cash flow in the calculation are each cash flowвҖҷs
share of the bondвҖҷs full price (i.e., present value). Before we introduce the general
equation, letвҖҷs take a specific example to demonstrate the calculation of Macaulay
duration: BRWAвҖҷs 10-year, 6.2% (annual) coupon eurobond used in the previous lessons.
Exhibit 4 illustrates the calculation of Macaulay duration at issuance, assuming
the bond was issued at par, settled on 15 October 2025, and matures on 15 October
2035. Because this is a corporate bond, we assume a 30/360 day-count basis.
Exhibit 4: Macaulay Duration of BRWA Corp. 10-Year, 6.2% Annual Eurobond
at Issuance

Coupon
Coupon frequency per year
Price per 100 par value
Yield-to-maturity

6.20%
1
100
6.20%

Settlement date

15 October 2025

Maturity

15 October 2035

Years to maturity

10

252

Learning Module 10

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
Interest Rate Risk and Return

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(4) Г· Sum
of present
values

(1) Г— (5)

Present
value

Weight

Time to
receipt Г—
weight

Period

Time to receipt

Cash
flow

1

1

6.2

5.8380

0.0584

0.0584

2

2

6.2

5.4972

0.0550

0.1099

3

3

6.2

5.1763

0.0518

0.1553

4

4

6.2

4.8741

0.0487

0.1950

5

5

6.2

4.5895

0.0459

0.2295

6

6

6.2

4.3216

0.0432

0.2593

7

7

6.2

4.0693

0.0407

0.2849

8

8

6.2

3.8317

0.0383

0.3065

9

9

6.2

3.6080

0.0361

0.3247

10

10

106.2

58.1942

0.5819

5.8194

100.0000

1.0000

7.7429

в– 

Columns 1 and 2 show the number of periods and the time to receipt of the
cash flow, respectively. If the calculation is done at issuance or on a coupon
date, they are equal.

в– 

Column 3 is the cash flow per 100 of par value, and column 4 is the present
value of that cash flow.

в– 

The fifth column is the weight, or each cash flowвҖҷs share of total PV. Notice
that the final payment, PMTN + FVN, of 106.2 accounts for 58% of the
bondвҖҷs PV.

в– 

The sixth column is the time to receipt of the cash flow (Column 2) multiplied by the weight (Column 5). The sum of this column is the Macaulay
duration, 7.7429. This is close to Hightest CapitalвҖҷs investment horizon of
eight years from the prior lesson, which means that Hightest has balanced
its reinvestment and price risk.

Macaulay duration is often quoted as an annualized statistic. Since this bond pays
coupons annually, no adjustment is needed. If the bond were a semiannual coupon
bond, we would divide the Macaulay duration by 2 (two semiannual periods per year)
to obtain an annualized Macaulay duration. When quoted as an annualized statistic,
the units for Macaulay duration is years.
Notice how 7.7429 years is less than 10, the time-to-maturity of the bond. This is
because Macaulay duration is a present valueвҖ“weighted average of the time to receipt
of the cash flows, while time-to-maturity is the time to receipt of the final cash flow.
The general calculation of Macaulay duration, MacDur, that also accounts for
partial coupon periods if the calculation is done between coupon dates is shown in
Equation 2.

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.

Macaulay Duration
вҺ§

вҺ«

)вҖӢ
вҖӢ
вҖӢ(1 + r)вҖӢ
вҖӢ
_
вҺӘвҖӢ(1 вҲ’ t / T)вҖӢ[вҖӢвҖӢ(1P+вҖӢVr
вҖӢ вҖӢ+ вҖӢ(2 вҲ’ t / T)вҖӢ[_
вҖӢ Full вҖӢ]вҖӢ+ вӢҜ +вҺӘ
вҖӢFullвҖӢ ]
P вҖӢVвҖӢ вҖӢ

PMT
_

вҖӢ

PMT
_

1вҲ’t/T вҖӢ

вҖӢ

2вҲ’t/T вҖӢ

	вҖӢMacDur = вҖӢвҺЁвҖӢ
вҖҜвҖҜвҖҜвҖҜвҖҜ
вҖӢвҺ¬вҖӢ вҖӢ,вҖӢ	
PMT
+ FV
_

вҺӘ(

(2)

вҺӘ

вҖӢ(
вҖӢ
вҖӢ 1 + r)вҖӢNвҲ’t/TвҖӢ
вҖӢвҺ©N вҲ’ t / T)вҖӢ[_
вҖӢ Full ]
вҖӢвҖӢ
P вҖӢVвҖӢ вҖӢ

вҺӯ

where
t is the number of days from the last coupon payment to the settlement date;
T is the number of days in the coupon period;
t/T is the fraction of the coupon period that has passed since the last payment;
PMT is the coupon payment per period;
FV is the future value paid at maturity, or the par value of the bond;
r is the yield-to-maturity per period; and
N is the number of evenly spaced periods to maturity as of the beginning of
the current period.
EXAMPLE 5

Macaulay Duration between Coupon Dates
Now letвҖҷs compute the Macaulay duration for the BRWA bond between coupon datesвҖ”specifically, on 11 December 2025, 57 days after issuance. The only
difference from the prior example is that we are 57 days in the future, so rather
than t/T = 0 like at issuance, t/T = 57/360, and each cash flowвҖҷs time to receipt
is 57 days earlier.
вҖӢ

Macaulay Duration of BRWA Corp. 10-Year, 6.2% Annual Eurobond
Settling 57 Days after Issuance
вҖӢ

вҖӢ

Coupon

6.20%

Coupon frequency per year

1

Price per 100 par value

100

Yield-to-maturity

6.20%

Settlement date

11 December 2025

Maturity

15 October 2035

Years to maturity

10
вҖӢ

вҖӢ

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(4) Г· Sum of
present values

(1) Г— (5)

вҖӢ

вҖӢ

Period

Time to
receipt

Cash
flow

Present
value

Weight

Time to receipt Г—
weight

1

0.8417

6.2

5.8939

0.0584

0.0491

2

1.8417

6.2

5.5498

0.0550

0.1012

253

254

Learning Module 10

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
Interest Rate Risk and Return

Period

Time to
receipt

Cash
flow

Present
value

Weight

Time to receipt Г—
weight

3

2.8417

6.2

5.2258

0.0518

0.1471

4

3.8417

6.2

4.9207

0.0487

0.1872

5

4.8417

6.2

4.6335

0.0459

0.2222

6

5.8417

6.2

4.3630

0.0432

0.2525

7

6.8417

6.2

4.1082

0.0407

0.2784

8

7.8417

6.2

3.8684

0.0383

0.3005

9

8.8417

6.2

3.6426

0.0361

0.3190

10

9.8417

106.2

58.7511

0.5819

5.7273

100.9570

1.0000

7.5845

вҖӢ

Comparing this example to the prior example, we see that the time to receipt of
each flow is lower, reflecting the fact that we are 57 days later, which increases
the present value of each cash flow. However, the present value weight of each
cash flow remains the same. The Macaulay duration (7.5845) is lower than in
the prior example (7.7429), reflecting the lower times to receipt.
This example demonstrates an important property of Macaulay duration: it is
not static; it falls as time elapses and the time to receipt of each cash flow falls.
Besides a spreadsheet, Macaulay duration also can be calculated using the
DURATION function in Microsoft Excel or Google Sheets:
=DURATION(Settlement, Maturity, Coupon, Yld, Frequency, [Basis])
where
Settlement is the date of settlement, in DATE form
Maturity is the maturity date, in DATE form
Coupon is the annual coupon rate
Yld is the annualized yield-to-maturity
Frequency is the periodicity, typically the number of coupon payments per
year; it is 1 for annual, 2 for semiannual, 4 for quarterly
[Basis] is the day-count convention; 0 or omitted is 30/360, 1 is act/act, 2 is
act/360, 3 is act/365
Finally, another approach to calculating Macaulay duration is to use a closed-form
equation derived using calculus and algebra, shown as Equation 3:
1 + r + вҖӢ[N Г— (c вҲ’ r)]вҖӢ
t
+ r _______________
вҖӢ вҖӢвҲ’ _
вҖӢT вҖӢ	
	вҖӢMacDur = вҖӢ{вҖӢ1_
r вҖӢвҲ’ вҖӢвҖҜвҖҜ
N
}
c Г— [вҖӢ(1 + r)вҖӢ вҖӢвҲ’ 1 + r

(3)

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.

Macaulay Duration

where
r is the yield-to-maturity per period;
N is the number of evenly spaced periods to maturity as of the beginning of
the current period;
c is the coupon rate per period;
t is the number of days from the last coupon payment to the settlement date;
and
T is the number of days in the coupon period.
QUESTION SET
1. Consider a bond that has three years remaining to maturity and a
coupon of 4% paid semiannually and is priced at 100. The bondвҖҷs annualized
Macaulay duration is closest to:
A. 2.801 years.
B. 2.857 years.
C. 3.000 years.
Solution:
B is correct.
вҖӢ

Time to
receipt

Cash
flow

Present value

Weight

Time to
receipt Г—
weight

1

1

2

1.961

0.0196

0.01961

2

2

2

1.922

0.0192

0.03845

3

3

2

1.885

0.0189

0.05654

4

4

2

1.848

0.0185

0.07391

5

5

2

1.811

0.0181

0.09057

6

6

102

90.573

0.9057

5.43438

100.00000

1.00000

5.71346

Period

Annualized Macaulay duration (years)

2.857
вҖӢ

2. An investor with a three-year investment horizon purchases a bond with
four years remaining to maturity, a coupon of 1% paid semiannually, and a
yield-to-maturity of 0.90%. With respect to interest rate risk, the investor is
primarily concerned about:
A. rising interest rates.
B. falling interest rates.
C. neither rising nor falling interest rates.
Solution:
A is correct. The Macaulay duration of the bond is 3.9312 years.

255

256

Learning Module 10

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
Interest Rate Risk and Return

вҖӢ

Time to
Receipt

Cash Flow

PV

Weight

Time to
Receipt Г—
Weight

1.0000

1.0000

0.5000

0.4978

0.0050

0.0050

2.0000

2.0000

0.5000

0.4955

0.0049

0.0099

Period

3.0000

3.0000

0.5000

0.4933

0.0049

0.0147

4.0000

4.0000

0.5000

0.4911

0.0049

0.0196

5.0000

5.0000

0.5000

0.4889

0.0049

0.0243

6.0000

6.0000

0.5000

0.4867

0.0048

0.0291

7.0000

7.0000

0.5000

0.4845

0.0048

0.0338

8.0000

8.0000

100.5000

96.9542

0.9658

7.7260

100.3920

1.0000

7.8624

Annualized MacDur (years)

3.9312

вҖӢ

When the Macaulay duration of a bond is longer than the investorвҖҷs investment horizon (three years), price risk dominates and the investorвҖҷs primary
downside concern is rising interest rates.
3. Consider a bond that has five years remaining to maturity, a coupon of 0.5%
paid annually, and a yield-to-maturity of вҖ“0.20%. The bondвҖҷs annualized
Macaulay duration is closest to:
A. 2.4758.
B. 4.9515.
C. 5.3130.
Solution:
B is correct.
вҖӢ

Time to
Receipt

CF

PV

Weight

Time to
Receipt Г—
Weight

1.0000

1.0000

0.5000

0.5010

0.0048

0.0048

2.0000

2.0000

0.5000

0.5020

0.0048

0.0097

3.0000

3.0000

0.5000

0.5030

0.0049

0.0146

4.0000

4.0000

0.5000

0.5040

0.0049

0.0195

5.0000

5.0000

100.5000

101.5111

0.9806

4.9029

103.5211

1.0000

4.9515

Period

вҖӢ

4. Consider a bond that has five years remaining to maturity, a coupon of 0.5%
paid annually, and a yield-to-maturity of вҖ“0.20%. Assume it is 91 days into
the first coupon period and a 30/360 basis. The bondвҖҷs annualized Macaulay
duration is closest to:
A. 4.2371.
B. 4.5054.
C. 4.6987.
Solution:
C is correct.

Macaulay Duration

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.

вҖӢ

Time to
Receipt

Cash Flow

PV

Weight

Time to
Receipt Г—
Weight

1.0000

0.7472

0.5000

0.5007

0.0048

0.0036

2.0000

1.7472

0.5000

0.5018

0.0048

0.0085

Period

3.0000

2.7472

0.5000

0.5028

0.0049

0.0133

4.0000

3.7472

0.5000

0.5038

0.0049

0.0182

5.0000

4.7472

100.5000

101.4597

0.9806

4.6550

103.4687

1.0000

4.6987

вҖӢ

Note that a straightforward way to calculate Macaulay duration using a
spreadsheet between coupon periods is to set the first cash flowвҖҷs time to
receipt as 1 вҖ“ t/T (here = 1 вҖ“ 91/360) and subsequent times to receipt as the
prior plus 1.

257

258

Learning Module 10

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
Interest Rate Risk and Return

PRACTICE PROBLEMS
1. Assuming no capital gain or loss when the bond is sold, an investorвҖҷs horizon
yield is equal to a bondвҖҷs yield-to-maturity at the time of investment if coupons
are reinvested at a rate:
A. lower than the bondвҖҷs yield-to-maturity at investment.
B. equal to the bondвҖҷs yield-to-maturity at investment.
C. higher than the bondвҖҷs yield-to-maturity at investment.
2. An investor purchases an eight-year, 6.4% annual coupon eurobond priced at
par (settlement: 15 June 2031; maturity: 15 December 2039) and sells it after six
years. Assuming interest rates rise by 100 bps immediately after purchase, the
investorвҖҷs rate of return at the end of six years is:
A. lower than 6.4%.
B. equal to 6.4%.
C. higher than 6.4%.
3. The carrying value of a bond purchased at a price below par is equal to the original purchase price:
A. minus the accumulated premium amortization.
B. minus the accumulated discount amortization.
C. plus the accumulated discount amortization.
4. The duration gap at which reinvestment risk and price risk are equal is:
A. less than zero.
B. equal to zero.
C. greater than zero.
5. When an investorвҖҷs investment horizon is less than a bondвҖҷs Macaulay duration,
the investor faces downside risk if, after the purchase of the bond, interest rates:
A. decrease.
B. increase.
C. either decrease or increase.
6. An investor purchases a 12-year, 5.8% annual bond and intends to sell it after 10
years. The Macaulay duration of the bond is 8.97 years. If interest rates fall by 75
bps immediately after the purchase of the bond, the investor faces:
A. negative reinvestment risk.
B. no reinvestment risk.
C. positive reinvestment risk.

Practice Problems

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.

7. Consider a bond that has three years remaining to maturity, a coupon of 4% paid
semiannually, and a yield-to-maturity of 4.60%. Assuming it is 12 days into the
first coupon period and a 30/360 basis, the bondвҖҷs annualized Macaulay duration
is closest to:
A. 1.8764 years.
B. 2.8386 years.
C. 2.8553 years.
8. Hightest Capital purchases a seven-year, 6.4% coupon bond and has an intended investment horizon of four years. The Macaulay duration of the bond is 5.86
years. If interest rates increase by 50 bps immediately after buying the bond,
Hightest Capital faces:
A. negative price risk.
B. negative reinvestment risk.
C. positive price risk.

259

260

Learning Module 10

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
Interest Rate Risk and Return

SOLUTIONS
1. B is correct. For the horizon yield to match the original yield-to-maturity of the
bond, two conditions must be met:
(1) The coupon payments are reinvested at the original yield-to-maturity.
(2) The bond is sold at the constant-yield price trajectory, implying no capital
gain or loss when the bond is sold.
Since there is no gain or loss when the bond is sold, the horizon yield will be
equal to the yield-to-maturity if the first condition is met (i.e., the coupons are
reinvested at the original yield-to-maturity).
A is incorrect because the horizon yield will be lower than the yield-to-maturity
if the coupons are reinvested at a lower rate than the original yield-to-maturity,
assuming no capital gain or loss on sale of the bond.
C is incorrect because the horizon yield will be higher than the yield-to-maturity
if the coupons are reinvested at a higher rate than the original yield-to-maturity,
assuming no capital gain or loss on sale of the bond.
2. A is correct. The future value of reinvested coupon interest is
= FV(0.054,6,6.4,0,0) = 46.245.
The sale price of the bond at the end of six years is
= PV(0.054,2,6.40,100,0) = 98.202,
which results in a six-year horizon yield of 6.32%, which is lower than 6.40%:
1
_
FV вҖӢT вҖӢ

	вҖӢr = вҖӢ(_
вҖӢPV вҖӢ)вҖӢ вҖӢвҲ’ 1.вҖӢ
1
_
46.245 + 98.202 вҖӢ6 вҖӢ

вҖӢвҖҜвҖҜ
вҖӢ)вҖӢ вҖӢвҲ’ 1.вҖӢ
	вҖӢr = вҖӢ(____________
100
r = 0.0632 = 6.32%.
B and C are incorrect, because interest rates have risen and the investorвҖҷs investment horizon is not long enough to offset the price decline with additional
reinvestment return.
3. C is correct. A bond purchased at a discount will have its price вҖңpulled to parвҖқ as
it approaches maturity. Its carrying value at time t is equal to its purchase price
plus the accumulated discount amortization.
A is incorrect because a bond purchased below par is purchased at a discount,
not a premium.
B is incorrect because the accumulated discount amortization is added, not subtracted, from the purchase price to calculate carrying value.
4. B is correct. Reinvestment risk and price risk equally offset each other when an
investorвҖҷs investment horizon equals a bondвҖҷs Macaulay duration. This is when
the duration gap is zero.
A is incorrect because a duration gap of less than zero means that Macaulay
duration is less than the investorвҖҷs investment horizon and that reinvestment risk
is higher than price risk.
C is incorrect because when the duration gap is greater than zero, the Macaulay
duration is greater than the investorвҖҷs investment horizon, so price risk is higher
than reinvestment risk.

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.

Solutions

5. B is correct. If the investment horizon is less than the bondвҖҷs Macaulay duration,
then the investorвҖҷs risk is higher interest rates. For such an investor, the market
price risk dominates the coupon reinvestment risk.
A is incorrect because an investor faces risk due to a lower interest rate when the
investment horizon is greater than the bondвҖҷs Macaulay duration.
C is incorrect because when the investment horizon is less than the Macaulay duration, the investor faces risk due to higher interest rates, not lower interest rates.
6. A is correct. The investor has an investment horizon of 10 years, which is greater
than the Macaulay duration of 8.97 years. Therefore, reinvestment risk dominates
price risk.
B is incorrect because the investor faces reinvestment risk because the investment horizon is higher than the Macaulay duration.
C is incorrect because the investor faces negative coupon reinvestment risk, not
positive coupon reinvestment risk, since the coupons will be reinvested at a lower
interest rate.
7. B is correct.

Period

Time to
Receipt

Cash Flow

PV

Weight

Time to
Receipt Г—
Weight

1.0000

0.9333

2.0000

1.9580

0.0199

0.0186

2.0000

1.9333

2.0000

1.9140

0.0194

0.0376

3.0000

2.9333

2.0000

1.8709

0.0190

0.0557

4.0000

3.9333

2.0000

1.8289

0.0186

0.0730

5.0000

4.9333

2.0000

1.7878

0.0182

0.0896

6.0000

5.9333

102.0000

89.1261

0.9050

5.3695

98.4856

1.0000

5.6439

Annualized MacDur

2.8220

8. A is correct. Hightest CapitalвҖҷs investment horizon is four years, which is less
than the bondвҖҷs Macaulay duration of 5.86 years. Therefore, price risk dominates
reinvestment risk and Hightest Capital faces price risk from rising interest rates.
B is incorrect because the increase in interest rates is beneficial for coupon reinvestment. Therefore, Hightest Capital has positive reinvestment risk.
C is incorrect because Hightest Capital faces the risk that the price of the bond
will fall as a result of the 50 bp increase in interest rates and therefore has negative price risk.

261

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.

LEARNING MODULE

11

Yield-Based Bond Duration
Measures and Properties
LEARNING OUTCOMES
Mastery

The candidate should be able to:
define, calculate, and interpret modified duration, money duration,
and the price value of a basis point (PVBP)
explain how a bondвҖҷs maturity, coupon, and yield level affect its
interest rate risk

INTRODUCTION
Prior lessons explored two sources of interest rate riskвҖ”reinvestment risk and price
riskвҖ”and demonstrated how holding a bond for its Macaulay duration balances them.
This lesson and those that follow extend that discussion by introducing measures of
price risk. Two broad categories of such measures exist: those that assume underlying
bond cash flows are certain and measure price sensitivity to changes in a bondвҖҷs own
yield, which are covered in these lessons, and those that introduce the possibility of
a bond default and that measure price sensitivity to changes in a benchmark yield
curve, which are covered in later lessons. This lesson will illustrate how the interest
rate risk of a bond is a function of its features, including its time-to-maturity, coupon
rate, and yield.
Most of the examples and exhibits used throughout the reading can be downloaded
as a Microsoft Excel workbook. Each worksheet in the workbook is labeled with the
corresponding example or exhibit number in the text.
LEARNING MODULE OVERVIEW
в– 

Duration is a quantitative measure of interest rate risk. There
are several duration measures, including those that measure
a bondвҖҷs price sensitivity to changes in its own yield-to-maturity and
assume underlying cash flows are certain (yield duration) and those
that measure changes in a benchmark yield curve, with less certain
underlying cash flows (curve duration).

в– 

Macaulay duration, modified duration, money duration, and the price
value of a basis point (PVBP) are yield duration measures.

1

264

Learning Module 11

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
Yield-Based Bond Duration Measures and Properties

в– 

Modified duration is the slope or first derivative of the price of a bond
with respect to its yield-to-maturity, measuring the sensitivity of a
bondвҖҷs price to changes in its yield-to-maturity. Modified duration can
be calculated using a bondвҖҷs Macaulay duration and yield or through
approximation.

в– 

Money duration is an extension of modified duration and incorporates the size of the bond position in currency terms. Related to this
measure is the price value of a basis point, which is an estimate of the
change in the price of a bond for a 1 bp change in the bondвҖҷs yield.

в– 

Duration can be used to estimate the change in the price of a bond
in response to a change in yield, but it assumes a linear relationship
between price and yield even though, in fact, the relationship is nonlinear. This is most evident when estimating price changes for large
changes in yield and for bonds with certain features.

в– 

A bondвҖҷs features, including its time-to-maturity, coupon rate, and
yield-to-maturity, determine its duration. Duration, for a given bond,
is not static and decreases as the bond approaches maturity.

в– 

All else equal, a longer (shorter) time-to-maturity, a lower (higher)
coupon rate, or a lower (higher) yield-to-maturity results in higher
(lower) duration or higher (lower) interest rate risk.

LEARNING MODULE SELF-ASSESSMENT
These initial questions are intended to help you gauge your current level
of understanding of the learning module.
1. Match each of the following descriptions with the appropriate term:
вҖӢ

Description

Term

Present-value-weighted average time-to-receipt of a
bondвҖҷs cash flows

i. Money duration

Used to estimate the percentage change in a
bondвҖҷs price for a given change in the bondвҖҷs
yield-to-maturity

ii. Price value per basis point

The product of the annualized modified duration
and the full price of a bond

iii. Macaulay duration

Change in the full price of a bond for a 1 bp change
in yield

iv. Modified duration

вҖӢ

Solution:
Present value weighted average time-to-receipt of a bond cash flows matches with iii. Macaulay duration.
Used to estimate the percentage change in a bondвҖҷs price for a given change
in the bondвҖҷs yield-to-maturity matches with iv. Modified duration.
The product of the annualized modified duration and the full price of a bond
matches with i. Money duration.
Change in the full price of a bond for a 1 bp change in yield matches with ii.
Price value per basis point.

Introduction

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.

2. If all other characteristics of a bond are held constant, an increase in the
bondвҖҷs yield-to-maturity will most likely result in:
A. a decrease in the bondвҖҷs modified duration.
B. no change in the bondвҖҷs modified duration.
C. an increase in the bondвҖҷs modified duration.
Solution:
A is correct. An increase in the bondвҖҷs yield-to-maturity will result in a lower modified duration because future cash flows are discounted at a higher
rate, which reduces the present-value-weighted average of their time to
receipt.
B is incorrect because duration is affected by the present value of the bondвҖҷs
cash flows, which, in turn, is affected by the bondвҖҷs yield.
C is incorrect because an increase in the bondвҖҷs yield-to-maturity reduces
the present value of each cash flow and hence reduces the bondвҖҷs duration.
3. Consider a bond with an annualized modified duration of 4, a coupon of 5%,
and a price of 95. The expected change in the price of the bond, per 100 of
par value, for a 50 bp increase in the bondвҖҷs yield-to-maturity is closest to:
A. 4.75.
B. 3.80.
C. 1.90.
Solution:
C is correct. The money duration is 380:
MoneyDur = AnnModDur Г— PVFull.
MoneyDur = 4.0 Г— 95.
MoneyDur = 308.
This results in a change in price of вҖ“1.90 for a 50 bp increase in the bondвҖҷs
yield:
О”PVFull вүҲ вҲ’MoneyDur Г— О”Yield.
О”PVFull вүҲ вҲ’308 Г— 0.005.
О”PVFull вүҲ вҲ’1.90.
The change in price is negative for the increase in the yield-to-maturity.
4. Two bonds, Bond X and Bond Y, are identical except that Bond X has a lower coupon rate than Bond Y. Therefore:
A. the bonds will have identical modified duration.
B. Bond X will have a lower modified duration compared to Bond Y.
C. Bond Y will have a lower modified duration compared to Bond X.
Solution:
C is correct. If two bonds are identical in all other respects (e.g., time-to-maturity, yield, etc.), the bond with the lower coupon rate will have the higher
modified duration. This is because, compared to Bond Y, the present value
of each of Bond XвҖҷs coupon cash flows will make up less of the bondвҖҷs price,
while the contribution to the price of the bond from the face value will be
greater.

265

266

Learning Module 11

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
Yield-Based Bond Duration Measures and Properties

5. Estimating the price value per basis point by dividing the difference in the
price of a bond for a 0.0001 decrease and a 0.0001 increase by 2 ignores:
A. convexity of the bondвҖҷs priceвҖ“yield relationship.
B. concavity of the bondвҖҷs priceвҖ“yield relationship.
C. symmetry in the bondвҖҷs priceвҖ“yield relationship.
Solution:
A is correct. This formulation of the price value of a basis point does not
include an adjustment for convexity. This is important because the price
change for increases and decreases in yields is asymmetric, owing to the
convex relationship between price and yield.
6. The change in the price of a bond when its yield increases by 100 bps is best
described as:
A. less than the change in price for a decrease in its yield by 100 bps.
B. the same as the change in price for a decrease in its yield by 100 bps.
C. greater than the change in price for a decrease in its yield by 100 bps.
Solution:
A is correct. The priceвҖ“yield relationship for most bonds is convex, such
that the increase in the price of a bond is greater for yield decreases than a
decrease in the price for the same yield increase.

2

MODIFIED DURATION
define, calculate, and interpret modified duration, money duration,
and the price value of a basis point (PVBP)
Recall from prior lessons that the price of a bond moves inversely with its yield. We
can illustrate this by pricing bonds at varying yields-to-maturity. Exhibit 1 shows
prices for three bonds introduced in prior lessons at yields ranging from 0% to 10%.
Assume all the bonds are denominated in the same currency.
в– 

1-year, zero-coupon Australian government bond,

в– 

5-year, 3.2% semiannual coupon Bright Wheels Automotive Corporation
(BRWA) bond, and

в– 

30-year, 4.625% annual coupon Romanian government bond.

Modified Duration

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.

Exhibit 1: Three Bond Prices at Varying Yields-to-Maturity
300

Bond price (percent of par)

250

4.625% Coupon, 30-year
Romanian bond

200
150
100
50
0

3.2% Coupon, 5-year
BRWA bond
0% Coupon, 1-year
Australian bond

0%

1%

2%

3%

4%
5%
6%
Yield-to-maturity

7%

8%

9%

10%

Notice how each line shows a different priceвҖ“yield relationship. The line for the
zero-coupon, 1-year Australian government bond is nearly flat, while the line for the
30-year Romanian bond is steep and downward sloping. If an investor held all three
bonds and each bondвҖҷs yield increased from 2% to 3%, the changes in price for each
would be starkly different:
Price of 1-Year
Australian Bond

YTM

Price of 5-Year BRWA
Bond

Price of 30-Year
Romanian Bond

2%

98.039

105.683

158.791

3%

97.087

100.922

131.851

Change in Price
as YTM 2% вҶ’
3%

вҲ’1%

вҲ’5%

вҲ’17%

While graphs of the priceвҖ“yield relationship can help in visualizing different bondsвҖҷ
interest rate risk, numbers are more useful so that investors can rank bonds by their
price sensitivity to changes in yield.
A logical numerical expression for a bondвҖҷs interest rate risk is the slope, or first
derivative, of its priceвҖ“yield line. We would expect the slope of the line for the one-year
Australian bond, for example, to be relatively low, since the line is nearly flat. But we
would expect the slope of the line for the 30-year Romanian bond to be high since
that line is relatively steep. While candidates are not responsible for using calculus, we
show the steps required to find the first derivative of the priceвҖ“yield line to illustrate
the logic behind the equations.
Recall that the price, PV, of an option-free bond is the present value of the bondвҖҷs
cash flows.
	вҖӢPV = _
вҖӢ PMT 1 вҖӢ+ _
вҖӢ PMT 2 вҖӢ+ ... + _
вҖӢ PMT N вҖӢ+ _
вҖӢ
N вҖӢ.
вҖӢ(1 + r)вҖӢ вҖӢ

вҖӢ(1 + r)вҖӢ вҖӢ

вҖӢ(1 + r)вҖӢ вҖӢ

FV
вҖӢ(1 + r)вҖӢ вҖӢ

First, we take the derivative with respect to r, the yield-to-maturity:
(вҲ’ 1 ) PMT _
(вҲ’ 2 ) PMT
(вҲ’ N ) PMT _
(вҲ’ N ) FV
dPV
_
	вҖӢ dr вҖӢ = _
вҖӢ
вҖӢ+ вҖӢ
вҖӢ+ ... + _
вҖӢ
вҖӢ+ вҖӢ
вҖӢ.вҖӢ
вҖӢ(1 + r)вҖӢ2вҖӢ
вҖӢ(1 + r)вҖӢ3вҖӢ
вҖӢ(1 + r)вҖӢN+1вҖӢ вҖӢ(1 + r)вҖӢN+1вҖӢ
1 вҖӢ to get
Then, we factor out вҖӢвҲ’ вҖӢ_

(1 + r)
(1 )
PMT (2 )
PMT
(N ) PMT
(N ) FV
dPV
1
_
_
_
вҖӢ+ _
вҖӢ
вҖӢ+ ... + _
вҖӢ
вҖӢ+ _
вҖӢ
вҖӢ вҖӢ.вҖӢ
	вҖӢ dr вҖӢ = вҲ’ вҖӢ(1 + r) вҖӢ[вҖӢ
вҖӢ(1 + r)вҖӢNвҖӢ вҖӢ(1 + r)вҖӢNвҖӢ]
вҖӢ(1 + r)вҖӢ1вҖӢ вҖӢ(1 + r)вҖӢ2вҖӢ

267

268

Learning Module 11

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
Yield-Based Bond Duration Measures and Properties

While this gives us the change in a bondвҖҷs price for a change in yield, it does so in
terms of PV, but percentage change in price would be more useful. To get percentage
change, we divide by PV (price):
1
_ _
_ _
dPV
_
вҲ’ вҖӢ_
2вҖӢвҖӢ+ ... + вҖӢвҖӢ(1 + r)вҖӢNвҖӢвҖӢ+ вҖӢвҖӢ(1 + r)вҖӢNвҖӢвҖӢ]вҖӢ
вҖӢ dr вҖӢ
(1 + r) вҖӢ[вҖӢвҖӢ(1 + r)вҖӢ1вҖӢвҖӢ+ вҖӢвҖӢ(1 + r)вҖӢ
_
_____________________________________
	вҖӢ PV вҖӢ = вҖӢ
вҖҜвҖҜвҖҜвҖҜ
вҖҜвҖҜвҖӢ.вҖӢ
PV
(1 ) PMT

(2 ) PMT

(N ) PMT

(N ) FV

_
вҖӢPMT вҖӢ
(1 + r)

вҖӢ is the present value of that cash flow
Look closely at the term in brackets. Each вҖӢ_
PV

expressed as a percentage of the bond price, which is then multiplied by the time to
receipt of that cash flow. In other words, the term in brackets divided by PV is the
Macaulay duration, MacDur, introduced in prior lessons. We can substitute MacDur
in the equation to obtain
_
вҖӢ dr вҖӢ
1
_
	вҖӢ PV вҖӢ = вҲ’ вҖӢ_
(1 + r) вҖӢГ— MacDur,вҖӢ
dPV

or
_
вҖӢ dr вҖӢ
MacDur
_
	вҖӢ PV вҖӢ = вҲ’ вҖӢ_
(1 + r) вҖӢ.вҖӢ	
dPV

(1)

Without the negative sign, this is known as a bondвҖҷs modified duration, or ModDur:
	вҖӢModDur = вҖӢ_
(1 + r) вҖӢ.вҖӢ	
MacDur

(2)

ModDur can be annualized, like Macaulay duration, by dividing by the number of
coupon periods per year for the bond.
Since ModDur captures the relationship between a bondвҖҷs price and its yield, we
can use it to estimate the percentage price change for a bond given a change in its
yield-to-maturity, if we substitute вҖ“AnnModDur for the right side of Equation 1 and
multiply both sides by dr, or the change in annualized yield-to-maturity:
	вҖӢ%О”P вҖӢVвҖӢFullвҖӢ вүҲ вҲ’ AnnModDur Г— О”AnnYield.вҖӢ	

(3)

For example, if a bondвҖҷs modified duration is 5, its price will decrease by an estimated
5% for a 100 bp increase in yield: вҖ“5 Г— 0.01 = вҖ“5%. Therefore, the higher a bondвҖҷs
modified duration, the steeper its priceвҖ“yield relationship line is and the more sensitive
its price is to changes in yield.
The percentage price change refers to the full price, which includes accrued interest. The вүҲ sign indicates that this calculation is an estimation because it is a linear
approximation of the nonlinear relationship between price and yield, which will be
covered in detail in a later lesson. The negative sign indicates that bond prices and
yields-to-maturity move inversely with one another.
Modified duration can also be obtained directly using the MDURATION function
in Microsoft Excel or Google Sheets. The inputs are the same as the DURATION
function to calculate Macaulay duration:
= MDURATION(Settlement, Maturity, Coupon, Yld, Frequency, [Basis]).
EXAMPLE 1

Modified Duration for the BRWA Bond
We can use Equation 2 to calculate modified duration for the five-year BRWA
bond for settlement at issuance and for 57 days after issuance.
вҖӢ

Coupon
Coupon frequency per year

3.20%
2

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.

Modified Duration

Price per 100 par value

100

Yield-to-maturity

3.20%

Issuance date

15 Oct. 2025

Maturity

15 Oct. 2035

Years to maturity

5
вҖӢ

вҖӢ

Period

Time to
receipt

Cash flow

PV

Weight

Time Г—
Weight

1

1.0000

1.6

1.5748

0.0157

0.0157

2

2.0000

1.6

1.5500

0.0155

0.0310

3

3.0000

1.6

1.5256

0.0153

0.0458

4

4.0000

1.6

1.5016

0.0150

0.0601

5

5.0000

1.6

1.4779

0.0148

0.0739

6

6.0000

1.6

1.4546

0.0145

0.0873

7

7.0000

1.6

1.4317

0.0143

0.1002

8

8.0000

1.6

1.4092

0.0141

0.1127

9

9.0000

1.6

1.3870

0.0139

0.1248

10

10.0000

101.6

86.6875

0.8669

8.6688

100.0000

1.0000

9.3203

вҖӢ

At issuance, the Macaulay duration is 9.3203.
To solve for modified duration, we use Equation 2:
	вҖӢModDur = вҖӢ_
вҖӢ.вҖӢ
вҖӢ(1 + r)вҖӢ
MacDur

9.3203

	вҖӢModDur = вҖӢ_
0.032 вҖӢ.вҖӢ
_
1+(
вҖӢ вҖӢ 2 вҖӢ)вҖӢ

ModDur = 9.17351; AnnModDur = 4.58676.
For settlement 57 days after issuance, the Macaulay duration is 9.0036.
вҖӢ

Coupon

3.20%

Coupon frequency per year

1

Price per 100 par value

100

Yield-to-maturity

3.20%

Settlement date

15 Oct. 2025

Maturity

15 Oct. 2035

Years to maturity

10
вҖӢ

вҖӢ

Period

Time to
receipt

Cash flow

PV

Weight

Time Г—
Weight

1

0.6833

1.6

1.5827

0.0157

0.0108

2

1.6833

1.6

1.5578

0.0155

0.0261

3

2.6833

1.6

1.5333

0.0153

0.0409

269

270

Learning Module 11

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
Yield-Based Bond Duration Measures and Properties

Period

Time to
receipt

Cash flow

PV

Weight

Time Г—
Weight

4

3.6833

1.6

1.5091

0.0150

0.0553

5

4.6833

1.6

1.4854

0.0148

0.0692

6

5.6833

1.6

1.4620

0.0145

0.0827

7

6.6833

1.6

1.4390

0.0143

0.0957

8

7.6833

1.6

1.4163

0.0141

0.1083

9

8.6833

1.6

1.3940

0.0139

0.1204

10

9.6833

101.6

87.1244

0.8669

8.3942

100.5039

1.0000

9.0036

вҖӢ

To solve for modified duration, we use Equation 2:
	вҖӢModDur = вҖӢ_
(вҖӢ 1 + r)вҖӢ вҖӢ.вҖӢ
MacDur

9.0036

	вҖӢModDur = вҖӢ_
0.032 вҖӢ.вҖӢ
_
1 + вҖӢ(вҖӢ 2 вҖӢ)вҖӢ

ModDur = 8.86184; AnnModDur = 4.43092.
If the annual yield on BRWAвҖҷs five-year, 3.2% semiannual coupon bond, settling
on 15 October 2025 and maturing on 15 October 2030, were to instantaneously
(right after issuance) increase by 80 bps, to 4.00%, the estimated change in price
would be вҖ“3.67%.
%О”PVFull вүҲ вҖ“4.58676 Г— 0.0080 = вҖ“0.0366941.
If the yield-to-maturity were to instantaneously (right after issuance) decrease
by 80 bps, to 2.40%, the estimated change in price would be +3.67%.
%О”PVFull вүҲ вҖ“4.58676 Г— вҖ“0.0080 = 0.0366941.
Notice that the estimates for price changes are equal (in absolute value) for
both an increase and a decrease in the yield-to-maturity. However, as we saw in
Exhibit 1, the priceвҖ“yield relationship is not a straight line but, rather, a curved
or вҖңconvexвҖқ line. In a later lesson, we will add a вҖңconvexity adjustmentвҖқ to account
for this and improve the accuracy of price change estimations.

Approximate Modified Duration
While modified duration for a fixed-rate bond can be easily obtained if the Macaulay
duration is already known, an alternative approach is to approximate modified duration
by estimating the slope of the line tangent to the priceвҖ“yield curve of a bond, as shown
in Exhibit 2. This approach is useful for bonds with unknown Macaulay duration,
owing to contingency features or default risk, which will be shown in later lessons.

Modified Duration

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.

Exhibit 2: Approximating Modified Duration
PriceвҖ“yield curve

Price

PVвҖ“

Approximation for the
line tangent to the
priceвҖ“yield curve

PV0
Line tangent to the
priceвҖ“yield curve

PV+

DYield

DYield

Yield-to-maturity

The quoted full price of the bond is denoted PV0. To estimate the slope, the
yield-to-maturity is changed up and down by the same amountвҖ”the О”YieldвҖ”and is
used to calculate corresponding bond prices PV+ and PVвҖ“. We can use these variables
to find the slope of the line tangent to the priceвҖ“yield curve: the difference between
PV+ and PVвҖ“ divided by twice the assumed change in the yield-to-maturity. To find
the slope in terms of percentage change in PV0, we further divide by PV0. This is
shown as Equation 4.
(P вҖӢVвҖӢ вҖӢ) вҲ’ (P вҖӢVвҖӢ вҖӢ)

_______________
вҲ’
+
	вҖӢAnnModDur вүҲ 2вҖӢвҖҜвҖҜ
вҖҜвҖҜ
Г— (О”Yield ) Г— (P вҖӢVвҖӢ вҖӢ) вҖӢ.вҖӢ	

(4)

0

This equation approximates annualized modified duration; the frequency of coupon
payments and the periodicity of the yield-to-maturity are included in the bond price
calculations. The following example illustrates the accuracy of this approximation.
EXAMPLE 2

Approximate Modified Duration for the BRWA Bond
Consider BRWAвҖҷs 3.2% semiannual coupon payment bond for settlement 15
October 2025, maturing 15 October 2030 and yielding 3.2%. The full price (PV0)
is par or 100.00.
We can raise the annual yield-to-maturity by 5 bps, from 3.20% to 3.25%
(denoted r+), to obtain PV+ of 99.771.
	вҖӢP вҖӢV+вҖӢ вҖӢ = _
вҖӢ PMT 1 вҖӢ+ _
вҖӢ PMT 2 вҖӢ+ ... + _
вҖӢ PMT N вҖӢ+ _
вҖӢ
N вҖӢ.вҖӢ
вҖӢ(1 + вҖӢrвҖӢ+вҖӢ)вҖӢ вҖӢ

вҖӢ(1 + вҖӢrвҖӢ+вҖӢ)вҖӢ вҖӢ

1.6
вҖӢ 1 + 0.01625 вҖӢ вҖӢ

вҖӢ(1 + вҖӢrвҖӢ+вҖӢ)вҖӢ вҖӢ

1.6
вҖӢ 1 + 0.01625 вҖӢ вҖӢ

FV
вҖӢ(1 + вҖӢrвҖӢ+вҖӢ)вҖӢ вҖӢ

1.6
вҖӢ 1 + 0.01625 вҖӢ вҖӢ

100
вҖӢ 1 + 0.01625 вҖӢ вҖӢ

	вҖӢP вҖӢV+вҖӢ вҖӢ = ___________
вҖӢвҖҜвҖҜ
вҖӢ+ ___________
вҖӢвҖҜвҖҜ
вҖӢ+ ... + ____________
вҖӢ(вҖҜвҖҜ
вҖӢ+ ____________
вҖӢ(вҖҜвҖҜ
вҖӢ.вҖӢ
(
)1
(
)2
) 10
) 10
PV+ = 99.771.
And we can lower the annual yield-to-maturity by 5 bps, from 3.20% to 3.15%
(denoted rвҖ“), to obtain PVвҖ“ of 100.230.
	вҖӢP вҖӢVвҲ’вҖӢ вҖӢ = _
вҖӢ( PMT) 1 вҖӢ+ _
вҖӢ( PMT) 2 вҖӢ+ ... + _
вҖӢ( PMT) N вҖӢ+ _
вҖӢ(
вҖӢ.вҖӢ
)N
вҖӢ 1 + вҖӢrвҲ’вҖӢ вҖӢ вҖӢ вҖӢ

вҖӢ 1 + вҖӢrвҲ’вҖӢ вҖӢ вҖӢ вҖӢ

1.6
вҖӢ 1 + 0.01575 вҖӢ вҖӢ

вҖӢ 1 + вҖӢrвҲ’вҖӢ вҖӢ вҖӢ вҖӢ

1.6
вҖӢ 1 + 0.01575 вҖӢ вҖӢ

FV
вҖӢ 1 + вҖӢrвҲ’вҖӢ вҖӢ вҖӢ вҖӢ

1.6
вҖӢ 1 + 0.01575 вҖӢ вҖӢ

100
вҖӢ 1 + 0.01575 вҖӢ вҖӢ

	вҖӢP вҖӢVвҲ’вҖӢ вҖӢ = ___________
вҖӢвҖҜвҖҜ
вҖӢ+ ___________
вҖӢвҖҜвҖҜ
вҖӢ+ ... + ____________
вҖӢвҖҜвҖҜ
вҖӢ+ ____________
вҖӢ(вҖҜвҖҜ
вҖӢ.вҖӢ
(
)1
(
)2
(
) 10
) 10

271

272

Learning Module 11

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
Yield-Based Bond Duration Measures and Properties

PVвҲ’ = 100.230.
We can substitute these results into Equation 4 for the 5 bp change in the annual
yield-to-maturity, or О”Yield = 0.0005:
вҖӢ(P вҖӢVвҖӢ вҖӢ)вҖӢвҲ’ вҖӢ(P вҖӢVвҖӢ вҖӢ)вҖӢ

_______________
вҲ’
+
	вҖӢAnnModDur вүҲ 2вҖӢвҖҜвҖҜ
вҖҜвҖҜ
вҖӢ.вҖӢ
Г— вҖӢ(О”Yield)вҖӢГ— вҖӢ(P вҖӢV0вҖӢ вҖӢ)вҖӢ
100.230 вҲ’ 99.771

вҖӢвҖҜвҖҜ
	вҖӢAnnModDur вүҲ _____________
2вҖҜвҖҜ
Г— 0.0005 Г— 100 вҖӢ.вҖӢ
AnnModDur вүҲ 4.587.
The вҖңexactвҖқ annual modified duration we calculated for this BRWA bond was
4.58675, and the вҖңapproximationвҖқ is 4.586765вҖ”virtually identical results.
Therefore, although duration can be calculated using the Macaulay duration
approach, it can also be estimated quite accurately.
The Macaulay duration also can be approximated by multiplying the approximate
modified duration by 1 plus the yield per period.
AnnMacDur вүҲ AnnModDur Г— (1 + r)
	вҖӢвҖҜвҖҜвҖҜвҖҜвҖӢ	вҖӢ
вҖӢ

(5)

QUESTION SET
1. Suppose a 4%, semiannual coupon bond has an annualized Macaulay duration of 3.589. The anticipated percentage change in the bondвҖҷs full
price if the bondвҖҷs yield rises from 5% to 6% is closest to:
A. 3.485%.
B. 3.502%.
C. 3.589%.
Solution:
B is correct. The Macaulay duration in years is 3.589; therefore, the annualized modified duration is 3.502%:
	вҖӢModDur = вҖӢ_
(вҖӢ 1 + r)вҖӢ вҖӢ.вҖӢ
MacDur
3.589

	вҖӢModDur = вҖӢ_
(вҖӢ 1 + 0.025)вҖӢвҖӢ.вҖӢ
ModDur = 3.502.
This results in an estimated percentage change in price for a 100 bp increase
in yield of вҖ“3.502%:
%О”PVFull вүҲ вҲ’AnnModDur Г— О”AnnYield.
%О”PVFull вүҲ вҲ’3.502 Г— 0.01.
%О”PVFull вүҲ вҲ’3.502%.
2. True or false: Duration measures are used to measure the sensitivity of flat
bond prices to changes in yields.
A. True

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.

Modified Duration

B. False
Solution:
B is correct. Duration measures are used to measure the sensitivity of full
prices to changes in yields. Also known as the dirty price of a bond, full
prices include the appropriate time value of each cash flow, whereas the flat
price does not include accrued interest.
3. Bond C has a coupon rate of 1%, paid semiannually, and matures in five
years. If its yield-to-maturity is вҖ“0.5%, its Macaulay duration is most likely:
A. less than its modified duration.
B. the same as its modified duration.
C. greater than its modified duration.
Solution:
A is correct. Recall that a bondвҖҷs modified duration is equal to its Macaulay
duration divided by 1 plus its yield-to-maturity:
	вҖӢModDur = вҖӢ_
(1 + r) вҖӢ.вҖӢ
MacDur

If the yield, r, is negative, the denominator will be less than 1, which results
in a MacDur less than the modified duration.
4. Consider a zero-coupon bond that matures in five years and is priced to
yield 3%. The modified duration of this bond is:
A. less than five years.
B. five years.
C. more than five years.
Solution:
A is correct. The Macaulay duration of a zero-coupon bond is its
time-to-maturity, because a zero-coupon bond has a single cash flow with a
present value weight of 1.0. The modified duration of this zero-coupon bond
is less than its Macaulay duration because its yield is positive.
Questions 5вҖ“7 relate to the following information.
Deepak Chowdhury, a bond analyst, is evaluating the BRWA bond, the
1-year Australian government bond, and the 30-year Romanian government
bond. Assuming that all three bonds were issued on 15 October 2025 and it is
currently 15 January 2026, 92 days into the first coupon period, Chowdhury
has compiled the following data:
вҖӢ

Coupon
Coupon frequency
Yield-to-maturity
Maturity

BRWA

Australian

Romanian

3.200%

0.000%

4.625%

2

1

1

3.200%

1.000%

4.250%

15 October 2030

15 October 2026

15 October 2055

вҖӢ

273

274

Learning Module 11

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
Yield-Based Bond Duration Measures and Properties

5. Complete the following table:
вҖӢ

BRWA

Australian

Romanian

BRWA

Australian

Romanian

100.815

99.262

107.429

Full price (per 100 of par value)
Macaulay duration
Modified duration
Full price, assuming 5 bp YTM increase
Full price, assuming 5 bp YTM decrease
Approx. modified duration
вҖӢ

Solution:
вҖӢ

Full price (per 100 of par value)
Annualized Macaulay duration

4.405

0.744

16.939

Annualized modified duration

4.335

0.737

16.248

Full price, assuming 5 bp YTM increase

100.596

99.225

106.561

Full price, assuming 5 bp YTM decrease

101.033

99.299

108.307

Approx. annualized modified duration

4.335

0.737

16.249

вҖӢ

The calculations are shown in tabular form. Please refer to the candidate
learning ecosystem online for a spreadsheet in the downloadable Microsoft
Excel workbook. Note that while solutions are rounded to three decimal
places, other quantities are unrounded but shown only to three decimal
places for presentation purposes.
вҖӢ

BRWA Bond: Full Price and Duration
YTM (periodic)

0.01600
вҖӢ

вҖӢ

Period

Time to
Receipt

Cash Flow

PV

Weight

Time Г—
Weight

1

0.489

1.600

1.588

0.016

0.008

2

1.489

1.600

1.563

0.016

0.023

3

2.489

1.600

1.538

0.015

0.038

4

3.489

1.600

1.514

0.015

0.052

5

4.489

1.600

1.490

0.015

0.066

6

5.489

1.600

1.466

0.015

0.080

7

6.489

1.600

1.443

0.014

0.093

8

7.489

1.600

1.421

0.014

0.106

9

8.489

1.600

1.398

0.014

0.118

10

9.489

101.600

87.394

0.867

8.226

100.815

1.000

8.809

Annualized Macaulay Duration

4.405

Modified Duration

8.670

Annualized Modified Duration

4.335

вҖӢ

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.

Modified Duration

275

вҖӢ

BRWA Bond: Full price, assuming 5 bp YTM increase
YTM (periodic)

BRWA Bond: Full price, assuming 5 bp YTM decrease

0.01625

YTM (periodic)

0.01575

вҖӢ

вҖӢ

Period

Time to
Receipt

Cash Flow

PV+

Period

Time to
Receipt

Cash Flow

PV-

1

0.489

1.600

1.587

1

0.489

1.600

1.588

2

1.489

1.600

1.562

2

1.489

1.600

1.563

3

2.489

1.600

1.537

3

2.489

1.600

1.539

4

3.489

1.600

1.513

4

3.489

1.600

1.515

5

4.489

1.600

1.488

5

4.489

1.600

1.492

6

5.489

1.600

1.465

6

5.489

1.600

1.468

7

6.489

1.600

1.441

7

6.489

1.600

1.446

8

7.489

1.600

1.418

8

7.489

1.600

1.423

9

8.489

1.600

1.395

9

8.489

1.600

1.401

10

9.489

101.600

87.190

10

9.489

101.600

87.598

100.596

101.033

вҖӢ

вҖӢ

BRWA Bond: Approx. Ann. Modified Duration
PV0

100.815

PV+

100.596

PV-

101.033

Approximate Ann. ModDur

4.335
вҖӢ

вҖӢ

Australian Bond: Full Price and Duration
YTM (periodic)

0.010
вҖӢ

вҖӢ

Period

Time to
Receipt

Cash
Flow

PV

Weight

Time Г—
Weight

1

0.744

100.000

99.262

1.000

0.744

99.262

1.000

0.744

Annualized Macaulay
Duration

вҖӢ

0.744

Modified Duration

0.737

Annualized Modified
Duration

0.737

276

Learning Module 11

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
Yield-Based Bond Duration Measures and Properties

вҖӢ

Australian Bond: Full price, assuming
5 bp YTM increase

Australian Bond: Full price, assuming
5 bp YTM decrease

YTM (periodic)

YTM (periodic)

0.0095

0.0105

вҖӢ

вҖӢ

Period

Time to
Receipt

Cash
Flow

PV+

Period

Time to
Receipt

Cash
Flow

PV-

1

0.744

100.000

99.225

1

0.744

100.000

99.299

99.225

99.299
вҖӢ

вҖӢ

Australian Bond: Approx. Ann. Modified Duration
PV0

99.262

PV+

99.225

PV-

99.299

Approximate Ann. ModDur

0.737
вҖӢ

вҖӢ

Romanian Bond: Full Price and Duration
YTM (periodic)

0.0425

вҖӢ

вҖӢ

Time to
Receipt

Cash Flow

PV

Weight

Time Г—
Weight

1

0.744

4.625

4.484

0.042

0.031

2

1.744

4.625

4.301

0.040

0.070

3

2.744

4.625

4.126

0.038

0.105

4

3.744

4.625

3.958

0.037

0.138

Period

5

4.744

4.625

3.796

0.035

0.168

вҖҰ

вҖҰ

вҖҰ

вҖҰ

вҖҰ

вҖҰ

29

28.744

4.625

1.398

0.013

0.374

30

29.744

104.625

30.337

0.282

8.400

107.429

1.000

16.939

Annualized Macaulay
Duration

вҖӢ

16.939

Modified Duration

16.248

Annualized Modified
Duration

16.248

Modified Duration

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.

вҖӢ

Romanian Bond: Full price, assuming
5 bp YTM increase

Romanian Bond: Full price, assuming 5
bp YTM decrease

YTM (periodic)

YTM (periodic)

0.0430

0.0420

вҖӢ

вҖӢ

Period

Time to
Receipt

Cash
Flow

PV+

0.744

4.625

4.482

1

Time
to
Period Receipt
1

0.744

Cash
Flow

PV-

4.625

4.485

2

1.744

4.625

4.297

2

1.744

4.625

4.305

3

2.744

4.625

4.120

3

2.744

4.625

4.131

4

3.744

4.625

3.950

4

3.744

4.625

3.965

5

4.744

4.625

3.788

5

4.744

4.625

3.805

вҖҰ

вҖҰ

вҖҰ

вҖҰ

вҖҰ

вҖҰ

вҖҰ

вҖҰ

29

28.744

4.625

1.379

29

28.744

4.625

1.417

30

29.744

104.625

29.907

30

29.744

104.625

106.561

30.773
108.307

вҖӢ

вҖӢ

Romanian Bond: Approx. Ann. Modified Duration
PV0

107.429

PV+

106.561

PV-

108.307

Approx. ModDur

16.249
вҖӢ

6. Of these three bonds, identify which has the most and least interest rate
risk. Justify your answers.
Solution:

The Romanian bond has the most interest rate risk, reflected in the bondвҖҷs
Macaulay and modified durations, which are nearly four times that of the
BRWA bond.
The Australian bond has the least interest rate risk, because its Macaulay
and modified durations are less than a quarter of that of the BRWA bond.
7. ChowdhuryвҖҷs portfolio manager expects interest rates to decrease from
current levels. Which of these three bonds would most likely perform best in
that environment, all else equal? Justify your answer.
Solution:

The Romanian bond would perform best. A decrease in interest rates would
increase bond prices, with those having the greatest interest rate risk or
duration having the highest increase.

277

278

Learning Module 11

3

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
Yield-Based Bond Duration Measures and Properties

MONEY DURATION AND PRICE VALUE OF A BASIS
POINT
define, calculate, and interpret modified duration, money duration,
and the price value of a basis point (PVBP)
Modified duration is used to measure the percentage price change of a bond given
a change in its yield-to-maturity. A related statistic is money duration. The money
duration of a bond is a measure of the price change in currency units. The money
duration can be stated per 100 of par value or in terms of the actual position size. In
the United States, money duration is commonly called вҖңdollar duration.вҖқ
Money duration (MoneyDur) is the product of the annualized modified duration
and the full price (PVFull) of the bond, in either percent of par or the currency value
of the position.
MoneyDur = AnnModDur Г— PVFull.

(6)

The estimated change in the bond price in currency units is very similar to Equation
4. The difference is that for a given change in the annual yield-to-maturity (О”Yield),
modified duration estimates the percentage price change while money duration estimates the change in currency units.
%О”PVFull вүҲ вҲ’MoneyDur Г— О”Yield

(7)

BRWAвҖҷs five-year, 3.2% semiannual coupon bond, maturing 15 October 2030,
is priced to yield 3.2%. Assume it is purchased by an institutional investor for
settlement on 11 December 2025, so 57 days into the first coupon period (t/T
= 57/180).
The full price of the bond is 100.504 per 100 of par value, and the annualized
modified duration is 4.43092. Suppose the investor has a position in the bond
for a par value of USD100,000,000. Consequently,
в– 

the market value of the investment is USD100,503,921, and

в– 

the money duration of the investment is USD445,324,719 (= 4.43092 Г—
USD100,503,921).

Therefore, if the yield-to-maturity rises by 100 bpsвҖ”from 3.20% to 4.20%вҖ”the
expected loss is approximately USD4,453,247 (= вҖ“USD445,324,719 Г— 0.0100).
A similar measure is the price value of a basis point (PVBP), an estimate of the
change in the full price of a bond given a 1 bp change in its yield-to-maturity. The
PVBP can be calculated using a formula like that for approximating modified duration.
Equation 8 is the formula for the PVBP. PVвҖ“ and PV+ are the full prices calculated by
decreasing and increasing the yield-to-maturity by 1 bp.
вҖӢ(P вҖӢVвҖӢ вҖӢ)вҖӢвҲ’ вҖӢ(P вҖӢVвҖӢ вҖӢ)вҖӢ

___________
вҲ’
+
	вҖӢPVBP = вҖӢвҖҜвҖҜ
вҖӢ.вҖӢ	
2

(8)

The PVBP is also called the вҖңPV01,вҖқ standing for the вҖңprice value of an 01вҖқ or вҖңpresent
value of an 01,вҖқ where вҖң01вҖқ means 1 bp. In the United States, it is commonly called
the вҖңDV01вҖқ for the вҖңdollar valueвҖқ of 1 bp. The PVBP is particularly useful for bonds
for which future cash flows are uncertain, such as callable bonds. A related statistic
called a вҖңbasis point valueвҖқ (BPV) is simply the money duration times 0.0001 (1 bp).

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
Money Duration and Price Value of a Basis Point

For a numerical example of the PVBP calculation, again consider BRWAвҖҷs fiveyear, 3.2% semiannual coupon bond, maturing 15 October 2030 and priced to
yield 3.2%, purchased by the institutional investor for settlement on 11 December
2025, so 57 days into the first coupon period (t/T = 57/180).
To determine the PVBP of this bond, calculate the new prices by increasing
and decreasing the yield-to-maturity. First, increase the yield by 1 bp (0.01%),
from 3.20% to 3.21%, to solve for a PV+ of 100.459400.
вҖӢ(
вҖӢ+ ... + _
вҖӢ(
вҖӢ вҖӢГ— (вҖӢ 1.01605)вҖӢ57/180вҖӢ = 100.459400.вҖӢ
	вҖӢP вҖӢVвҖӢ+вҖӢ = [вҖӢ _
)1
) 10 ]
1.60
вҖӢ 1.01605 вҖӢ вҖӢ

101.60
вҖӢ 1.01605 вҖӢ вҖӢ

Then, decrease the yield-to-maturity by 1 bp, from 3.20% to 3.19%, to solve
for a PVвҖ“ of 100.548465.
вҖӢ(
вҖӢ+ ... + _
вҖӢ(
вҖӢ вҖӢГ— вҖӢ(1.01595)вҖӢ57/180вҖӢ = 100.548465.вҖӢ
	вҖӢP вҖӢVвҲ’вҖӢ вҖӢ = [вҖӢ _
)1
) 10 ]
1.60
вҖӢ 1.01595 вҖӢ вҖӢ

101.60
вҖӢ 1.01595 вҖӢ вҖӢ

The PVBP is obtained by substituting these results into Equation 8.
100.548465 вҲ’ 100.459400

вҖӢ = 0.044532.вҖӢ
	вҖӢPVBP = ___________________
вҖӢвҖҜвҖҜ
2
Exhibit 3 provides a summary of the various yield duration statistics. To recap,
they measure the instantaneous change in a bondвҖҷs price for a given change in its
own yield-to-maturity, assuming all other variables (especially, time-to-maturity) are
unchanged and the underlying cash flows are certain.

Exhibit 3: Summary of Yield-Based Duration Statistics
Measure

Calculation

Use

Macaulay
duration

Average time to receipt of promHolding period that would balance
ised cash flows, weighted by shares reinvestment and price risks for an
of the full price corresponding to
investor
each promised future cash flow

Modified
duration

First derivative of price with
Estimate the percentage price change
respect to yield; Macaulay duration for a bond given a change in its
divided by 1 + yield per period
yield-to-maturity

Money
duration

Modified duration multiplied by
full price of bond or bond position

Estimate price change in bond investment for a given yield change

Difference in price of a 1 bp yield
decrease and a 1 bp yield increase,
divided by 2

Estimate of the change in the bond
price given a 1 bp change in the
yield-to-maturity

Price value
of a basis
point

Yield Duration of Zero-Coupon and Perpetual Bonds
Because zero-coupon bonds have a single payment, the face value at maturity, the present weighted-average time to receipt of cash flows is the same as the time-to-maturity
because that single cash flow has a present value weight of 1.0. Therefore, the Macaulay
duration of a zero-coupon bond is its time-to-maturity, and modified duration is its
time-to-maturity divided by 1 plus its yield.

279

280

Learning Module 11

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
Yield-Based Bond Duration Measures and Properties

A perpetuity or perpetual bond is a bond that does not mature, so there is no face
or maturity value received at time T. The investor receives a fixed coupon payment
forever unless the bond is called. Non-callable perpetuities are rare, but they have an
interesting Macaulay duration:
MacDur = (1 + r)/r.

(9)

Duration of Floating-Rate Notes and Loans
As described in an earlier lesson, interest on floating-rate instruments varies depending
on the level of a market reference rate (MRR) plus a quoted margin. At predetermined
dates, payment amounts are reset to reflect changes in the MRR. Therefore, interest
rate risk arises only between reset dates, because at the next reset date, coupon payments will adjust to the new MRR. Therefore, the Macaulay duration for a floating-rate
note or bond is simply the fraction of a period remaining until the next reset date:
(вҖӢ T вҲ’ t)вҖӢ

	вҖӢMacDu вҖӢrвҖӢFloatingвҖӢ = _
вҖӢ T вҖӢ.вҖӢ	

(10)

If there are 180 days in the coupon period and 57 days have passed since the last
coupon, the Macaulay duration is
вҖӢ(180 вҲ’ 57)вҖӢ

вҖӢ 180 вҖӢ = 0.683333.вҖӢ
	вҖӢMacDu вҖӢrвҖӢFloatingвҖӢ = _
Floating-rate instruments typically have very low duration because coupon periods
are typically less than six months in length. As a result, they are commonly used by
investors to reduce duration in fixed-income portfolios.
KNOWLEDGE CHECK
An analyst is comparing the interest rate risk of the BRWA 3.2% bond
maturing 15 October 2030 to a floating-rate note (FRN) that also
matures 15 October 2030 and has its coupon reset semiannually.
At the last reset, 15 October 2027, the coupon rate of the FRN was 3.2%. The
BRWA bond was priced to yield 3.2% at that same date.
1. Why would you expect the FRN to have a lower duration than the BRWA
fixed-rate bond?
Solution:

A floating-rate instrument has a Macaulay duration that reflects the time to
the next coupon reset date, while a fixed-rate instrument has a Macaulay duration that primarily reflects time-to-maturity but also its coupon rate, yield,
and fraction of the coupon period that has passed. The maximum Macaulay
duration the FRN would have is six months, while the BRWA bond has a
Macaulay duration slightly lower than its maturity (five years).
2. Complete the following table:
вҖӢ

Macaulay duration
BRWA
15-Oct-2027
15-Nov-2027
15-Dec-2027
15-Jan-2028

FRN

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
Money Duration and Price Value of a Basis Point

Macaulay duration
BRWA

FRN

15-Feb-2028
15-Mar-2028
15-Apr-2028
вҖӢ

Solution:
вҖӢ

Macaulay duration
BRWA

FRN

15-Oct-2027

2.8843

0.0000

15-Nov-2027

2.8002

0.8306

15-Dec-2027

2.7169

0.6667

15-Jan-2028

2.6336

0.4973

15-Feb-2028

2.5502

0.3279

15-Mar-2028

2.4669

0.1694

2.4221

0.0000

15-Apr-2028
вҖӢ

For example, for 15 December 2027, the number of days since the next coupon is 61 days. The number of days in the coupon period is 183, calculated
using Microsoft Excel or Google Sheets as
= COUPDAYS(DATE(2027,12,15),DATE(2028,4,15),2,1).
Therefore, the Macaulay duration is (183 вҖ“ 61)Г·183 = 0.6667.

QUESTION SET
Deepak Chowdhury is evaluating a USD30 million investment in par
value terms in the BRWA, Australian, and Romanian bonds. Assume
all bonds are denominated in the same currency and that all three bonds were
issued on 15 October 2025.
Chowdhury is evaluating the bonds on 15 January 2026, 92 days into the first
coupon period. Chowdhury has compiled the following data.
вҖӢ

Characteristic
Coupon

BRWA

Australian

3.200%

0.000%

4.625%

2

1

1

Coupon frequency
Yield-to-maturity

Romanian

3.200%

1.000%

4.250%

Maturity

15 October 2030

15 October 2026

15 October 2055

Full price

100.815

99.262

107.429

Ann. Macaulay duration

4.405

0.744

16.939

Ann. modified duration

4.335

0.737

16.248

вҖӢ

As part of his analysis, Chowdhury is evaluating the potential change in the
prices of the bond investments for 1 bp and 100 bp changes in yields.

281

282

Learning Module 11

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
Yield-Based Bond Duration Measures and Properties

1. Complete the following table:
вҖӢ

Effect on a USD30 million
investment
BRWA

Australian

Romanian

Price value per basis point
Market value of investment (USD)
Money duration (percent of par)
Expected loss from a 100 bp YTM increase
(USD)
вҖӢ

Solution:
вҖӢ

Effect on a USD30 million investment
BRWA
Price value per basis point

Australia

0.044

Market value of investment (USD) 30,244,381
Money duration (percent of par)

0.007
29,778,597

437.054

Expected loss from a 100 bp YTM вҖ“1,311,163
increase (USD)

Romania
0.175
32,228,627

73.163
вҖ“219,490

1745.518
вҖ“5,236,553

вҖӢ

The calculations are shown in tabular form. Please refer to the candidate
learning ecosystem online for a spreadsheet in the downloadable Microsoft
Excel workbook. Note that while solutions are rounded to three decimal
places, other quantities are unrounded but shown only to three decimal
places for presentation purposes.
вҖӢ

BRWA Bond: Full price, assuming 1 bp YTM increase

BRWA Bond: Full price, assuming 1 bp YTM decrease

YTM (periodic)

YTM (periodic)

0.01605

0.01595
вҖӢ

вҖӢ

Period

Time to
Receipt

Period

Time to
Receipt

Cash Flow

PV+

Cash Flow

PV-

1

0.489

1.600

1.588

1

0.489

1.600

1.588

2

1.489

3

2.489

1.600

1.563

2

1.489

1.600

1.563

1.600

1.538

3

2.489

1.600

1.538

4

3.489

1.600

1.514

4

3.489

1.600

1.514

5

4.489

1.600

1.490

5

4.489

1.600

1.490

6

5.489

1.600

1.466

6

5.489

1.600

1.467

7

6.489

1.600

1.443

7

6.489

1.600

1.444

8

7.489

1.600

1.420

8

7.489

1.600

1.421

9

8.489

1.600

1.398

9

8.489

1.600

1.399

10

9.489

101.600

87.353

10

9.489

101.600

87.435

100.771

100.858
вҖӢ

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
Money Duration and Price Value of a Basis Point

283

вҖӢ

BRWA Bond
PV+

100.771

Full price

PV-

100.858

Par

30,000,000

PVBP

0.044

Market value

30,244,381

AnnModDur

4.335

MoneyDur

Full price

100.815

MV

MoneyDur

437.054

ChgYield

100.815

437.054
30,244,381

Exp. Loss

0.01
(1,311,163)

вҖӢ

вҖӢ

Australian Bond: Full price, assuming
1 bp YTM increase

Australian Bond: Full price, assuming
1 bp YTM decrease

YTM (periodic) 0.0101

YTM (periodic) 0.0099
вҖӢ

вҖӢ

Period

Time to
Receipt

Cash
Flow

PV+

1

0.744

100.000

99.255

Time to
Period Receipt
1

0.744

99.255

Cash
Flow

PV-

100.000

99.269
99.269

вҖӢ

вҖӢ

Australian Bond
PV+

99.255

Full price

PV-

99.269

Par

30,000,000

PVBP

0.007

Market value

29,778,597

AnnModDur

0.737

MoneyDur

Full price

99.262

MV

MoneyDur

73.163

ChgYield
Exp. Loss

99.262

73.163
29,778,597
0.01
(219,490)

вҖӢ

вҖӢ

Romanian Bond: Full price, assuming 1 bp YTM increase
YTM (periodic)

Romanian Bond: Full price, assuming 1 bp YTM
decrease
YTM
(periodic)

0.0426

0.0424

вҖӢ

вҖӢ

Period

Time to
Receipt

Cash Flow

PV+

Period

Time to
Receipt

Cash Flow

PV-

1

0.744

4.625

4.484

1

0.744

4.625

4.484

2

1.744

4.625

4.300

2

1.744

4.625

4.302

3

2.744

4.625

4.125

3

2.744

4.625

4.127

4

3.744

4.625

3.956

4

3.744

4.625

3.959

284

Learning Module 11

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
Yield-Based Bond Duration Measures and Properties

Period

Time to
Receipt

Cash Flow

PV+

Period

Time to
Receipt

Cash Flow

PV-

5

4.744

4.625

3.794

5

4.744

4.625

3.798

вҖҰ

вҖҰ

вҖҰ

вҖҰ

вҖҰ

вҖҰ

вҖҰ

вҖҰ

29

28.744

4.625

1.394

29

28.744

4.625

1.402

30

29.744

104.625

30.251

30

29.744

104.625

30.424

107.254

107.604
вҖӢ

вҖӢ

Romanian Bond
PV+

107.254

Full price

PV-

107.604

Par

30,000,000

PVBP

0.175

MV

32,228,627

AnnModDur

16.248

MoneyDur

Full price

107.429

MV

MoneyDur

1745.518

ChgYield
Exp. Loss

107.429

1745.518
32,228,627
0.01
(5,236,553)

вҖӢ

2. If the client believes that interest rates will rise in the future, with all else
held constant, which bond investment would most likely perform best?
Solution:

The Australian bond would perform best. Since it has the lowest duration
and PVBP, the expected loss on the investment from an increase in its yield
is lower than the BRWA and Romanian bonds. The expected loss from a 100
bp increase in yield on the BRWA bond, for example, is almost six times that
for the Australian bond (USD219,490 versus USD1.3 million).

4

PROPERTIES OF DURATION
explain how a bondвҖҷs maturity, coupon, and yield level affect its
interest rate risk
The Macaulay and modified yield duration statistics for a traditional fixed-rate bond
are primarily functions of the bondвҖҷs features: its time-to-maturity, its coupon rate,
its yield-to-maturity, and the fraction of the current coupon period that has elapsed.
The closed-form formula for Macaulay duration, presented in a prior lesson and again
here, is useful in demonstrating the characteristics of duration (the same characteristics
hold for modified duration, money duration, and price value of basis point).
Г— (c вҲ’ r)]вҖӢ
t
+ r 1 + r + вҖӢ[N
_______________
вҖӢ вҖӢвҲ’ _
вҖӢT вҖӢ
	вҖӢMacDur = вҖӢ{вҖӢ1_
r вҖӢвҲ’ вҖӢвҖҜвҖҜ
N
}
c Г— [вҖӢ(1 + r)вҖӢ вҖӢвҲ’ 1 + r

Properties of Duration

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.

The relationship between a bondвҖҷs duration and its features (r, c, N, and t/T) are
summarized in Exhibit 4.

Exhibit 4: Properties of Yield Duration Statistics
Effect on duration (interest rate risk) from an
increase in feature
Coupon rate, c

вҶ“ (Inverse relationship)

Yield to maturity, r

вҶ“ (Inverse relationship)

Time-to-maturity, T

вҶ‘ (Direct relationship)

Fraction of current coupon period that
has elapsed, t/T

вҶ“ (Inverse relationship)

Exhibit 5 illustrates the relationships between Macaulay duration and time-to-maturity
for premium, discount, zero-coupon, and perpetual bonds (the same characteristics
hold for modified duration, money duration, and price value of basis point).

Macaulay duration

Exhibit 5: Properties of Macaulay Duration

Time-to-maturity
Premium bond

Discount bond

Zero-coupon

Perpetuity

All else being equal,
в– 

a lower-coupon bond has a higher duration and more interest rate risk than
a higher-coupon bond.

The same pattern holds for the yield-to-maturity, so,
в– 

a lower yield-to-maturity increases the weighted average of the time to receipt
of cash flow and thus increases duration.

The reason is that lower coupons and lower yields increase the weight of the
maturity value or final cash flow and reduce the weight of nearer-term cash flows in
the bond price.
в– 

Longer times-to-maturity typically correspond to higher duration.

This pattern always holds for bonds trading at par or at a premium. In the
closed-form formula, the second expression within brackets is positive for premium and
par bonds, because the coupon rate (c) is greater than or equal to the yield-to-maturity

285

(r), so (c вҖ“ r) вүҘ 0, whereas the denominator is always positive. Therefore, the Macaulay
duration is always less than (1 + r)/r, and it approaches that threshold from below as
the time-to-maturity increases.
A curious result is illustrated in Exhibit 5 for discount bonds: at some point,
when the time-to-maturity is high enough, the Macaulay duration will exceed (1 +
r)/r, reach a maximum, and then decrease. This pattern develops when the number
of periods (N) is large and the coupon rate is below the yield-to-maturity, so (c вҖ“ r) <
0. Then, the numerator of the second expression within braces can become negative.
The implication is that for long-dated bonds trading at a discount to par, interest rate
risk could be lower than that of a shorter-term bond.
For a constant yield-to-maturity (r), the expression in braces in the closed-form
formula is unchanged as time passes during the period. Therefore, the Macaulay
duration decreases smoothly as time passes and then jumps upward after the coupon
is paid, which creates a вҖңsaw-toothвҖқ pattern. This pattern for the BRWA bond with
a constant yield-to-maturity is illustrated in Exhibit 6. As time passes, the Macaulay
duration decreases smoothly but jumps upward by a small amount on coupon dates.

Exhibit 6: Macaulay Duration between Coupon Payments with Constant
Yield-to-Maturity for the BRWA 3.2% Bond
4.900
4.700
4.500
4.300
4.100
3.900
3.700
2/10/2027

1/20/2027

12/9/2026

12/30/2026

11/18/2026

10/7/2026

10/28/2026

9/16/2026

8/5/2026

Date of measurement

8/26/2026

7/15/2026

6/3/2026

6/24/2026

5/13/2026

4/1/2026

4/22/2026

3/11/2026

2/18/2026

1/7/2026

1/28/2026

12/17/2025

11/26/2025

11/5/2025

3.500
10/15/2025

Learning Module 11

Macaulay duration

286

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
Yield-Based Bond Duration Measures and Properties

Properties of Duration

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.

QUESTION SET
1. For each pair of bonds, indicate the bond that most likely has greater interest rate risk:
вҖӢ

First bond

Second bond

Which has greater
interest rate risk?

5% coupon, paid semiannually, and five years to
maturity, priced to yield
6%
4% coupon, paid semiannu4% coupon, paid semiannu- ally, and six years to matually, and five years to matu- rity, priced to yield 6%
rity, priced to yield 6%
5% coupon, paid semiannually, and five years to maturity, priced to yield 8%
4% coupon, paid semiannually, and five years to maturity, priced to yield 4%
вҖӢ

Solution:
вҖӢ

First bond

Second bond
5% coupon, paid semiannually, and five years to
maturity, priced to yield
6%

4% coupon, paid semiannu4% coupon, paid semiannu- ally, and six years to matually, and five years to matu- rity, priced to yield 6%
rity, priced to yield 6%
5% coupon, paid semiannually, and five years to maturity, priced to yield 8%
4% coupon, paid semiannually, and five years to maturity, priced to yield 4%

Which has greater
interest rate risk?

First bond

Second bond

First bond

First bond

вҖӢ

2. A bond analyst is comparing Bond D, a perpetual bond with a coupon of 5%,
with Bond E, a zero-coupon bond maturing in five years. If both bonds are
priced to yield 6%, Bond D has:
A. lower interest rate risk.
B. the same interest rate risk.
C. higher interest rate risk.
Solution:
C is correct. The Macaulay duration for Bond D is 1.06/0.06 = 17.667. The
Macaulay duration for Bond E is five years. The perpetual bond, Bond D, has
higher interest rate risk.

287

Learning Module 11

3. The graph depicts the priceвҖ“yield relationships for three bonds, Bond X,
Bond Y, and Bond Z. The three bonds have the same coupon rate, 5%.

Price

288

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
Yield-Based Bond Duration Measures and Properties

200
180
160
140
120
100
80
60
40
20
0

1.0%

2.0%

3.0%

4.0%

5.0%

6.0%

7.0%

8.0%

9.0%

10.0%

Yield-to-maturity
Bond X

Bond Z

Bond Y

Which of the three bonds most likely has the longest time to maturity?
A. Bond X
B. Bond Y
C. Bond Z
Solution:
B is correct. Bond Y has the steepest price-yield line, indicating that
it has the greatest modified duration and, most likely, the longest
time-to-maturity.
4. Between coupon payments, if the yield-to-maturity does not change, the
Macaulay duration of a bond:
A. decreases throughout the coupon period.
B. is constant throughout the coupon period.
C. increases throughout the coupon period.
Solution:
A is correct. During the coupon period, the Macaulay duration declines
smoothly until the next coupon period, at which time it jumps. This is illustrated in Exhibit 6.
5. Two bonds have the same time-to-maturity and yield-to-maturity, but one
is trading at a premium to par and the other at a discount. The Macaulay
duration for the premium bond is most likely_________ that of the discount
bond.
A. lower than
B. the same as
C. higher than
Solution:
A is correct. If two bonds have the same maturity and the same yield-to-maturity but one trades at a premium and one trades at a discount to par, the
premium bond must have a higher coupon rate. Therefore, the premium
bond has the lower Macaulay duration.

Practice Problems

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.

PRACTICE PROBLEMS
1. True or false: Curve duration is a type of yield duration.
A. True
B. False

The following information relates to questions
2-7
A portfolio manager is assessing the interest rate risk of three bonds as she considers making an investment of USD50 million. All three bonds are issued on 1
June 2026 and mature on 1 June 2030, and they have the following characteristics:
Characteristic

Bond One

Bond Two

Bond Three

Coupon (semiannual)

7%

3%

5%

Yield-to-maturity

3%

7%

5%

2. The Macaulay duration, in years, for Bond One is closest to:
A. 3.54.
B. 3.59.
C. 3.78.
3. The modified duration for Bond Two is closest to:
A. 3.59.
B. 3.65.
C. 3.78
4. Relative to a five-year zero-coupon bond priced to yield 5%, Bond Three has a
modified duration that is best described as:
A. lower than the zero-coupon bondвҖҷs modified duration.
B. the same as the zero-coupon bondвҖҷs modified duration.
C. greater than the zero-coupon bondвҖҷs modified duration.
5. If the yields-to-maturity for all three bonds were to increase by 100 bps, which
bond has the greatest anticipated decrease in price?
A. Bond One
B. Bond Two
C. Bond Three

289

290

Learning Module 11

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
Yield-Based Bond Duration Measures and Properties

6. Which bond has the highest price value of a basis point?
A. Bond One
B. Bond Two
C. Bond Three
7. The portfolio manager is interested in comparing the interest rate risk of Bond
Three to that of Bond Four, a floating-rate note that resets every six months. On
1 June 2026, both bonds were priced to yield 5%. If the yield changes from 5%
to 5.25% halfway through the first coupon period, which bond has the greater
Macaulay duration?
A. Bond Three
B. Bond Four
C. Neither: The Macaulay duration is the same for both bonds.

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.

Solutions

SOLUTIONS
1. B is correct. The Macaulay, modified, and money duration measures, as well as
the price value of a basis point, are all types of yield duration. The curve duration
is not classified as a type of yield duration.
2. B is correct.
Period

Time to
receipt

Cash
flow

Present value

Weight

Time to receipt
Г— weight

1

1.0000

3.5

3.44828

0.02999

0.02999

2

2.0000

3.5

3.39732

0.02955

0.05910

3

3.0000

3.5

3.34711

0.02911

0.08734

4

4.0000

3.5

3.29764

0.02868

0.11473

5

5.0000

3.5

3.24891

0.02826

0.14129

6

6.0000

3.5

3.20090

0.02784

0.16704

7

7.0000

3.5

3.15359

0.02743

0.19200

8

8.0000

103.5

91.87810

0.79914

6.39308

114.97185

1.00000

7.18458

Annualized Macaulay duration

3.59229

3. B is correct.
Period

Time to
receipt

Cash
flow

Present value

Weight

Time to receipt Г—
weight

1

1.0000

1.5

1.44928

0.01680

0.01680

2

2.0000

1.5

1.40027

0.01623

0.03247

3

3.0000

1.5

1.35291

0.01569

0.04706

4

4.0000

1.5

1.30716

0.01516

0.06062

5

5.0000

1.5

1.26296

0.01464

0.07321

6

6.0000

1.5

1.22025

0.01415

0.08488

7

7.0000

1.5

1.17899

0.01367

0.09568

8

8.0000

101.5

77.08027

0.89366

7.14930

86.25209

1.00000

7.56003

Annualized Macaulay duration

3.780016

Modified duration

3.652190

4. A is correct. No calculation is necessary, as we know that a five-year zero-coupon
bond has a Macaulay duration of 5, which is greater than that of a coupon bond
like Bond three. Since they have the same yields, the bondвҖҷs modified durations
will have the same relationship as their Macaulay duration.
Alternatively, we can calculate Bond ThreeвҖҷs modified duration of 3.585:

291

292

Learning Module 11

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
Yield-Based Bond Duration Measures and Properties

Period

Time to
receipt

Cash
flow

Present value

Weight

Time to receipt
Г— weight

1

1.0000

2.5

2.43902

0.02439

0.02439

2

2.0000

2.5

2.37954

0.02380

0.04759

3

3.0000

2.5

2.32150

0.02321

0.06964

4

4.0000

2.5

2.26488

0.02265

0.09060

5

5.0000

2.5

2.20964

0.02210

0.11048

6

6.0000

2.5

2.15574

0.02156

0.12934

7

7.0000

2.5

2.10316

0.02103

0.14722

8

8.0000

102.5

84.12652

0.84127

6.73012

100.00000

1.00000

7.34939

Annualized Macaulay duration

3.6747

Modified duration

3.5851

The zero-couponвҖҷs modified duration is 5/(1 + 0.05) = 4.7619.
5. B is correct.
Bond One

Bond Two

Bond Three

Full price (percent of par)

114.972

86.252

100.000

Modified duration

3.539

3.652

3.585

Investment (in USD millions)

50

50

50

Money duration

176.960

182.609

179.253

Change in value (in USD millions)

вҖ“1.770

вҖ“1.826

вҖ“1.793

6. A is correct.
Bond One

Bond Two

Bond Three

Price

114.972

86.252

100.000

Price + 1 bp

114.931

86.221

99.964

Price вҖ“ 1 bp

115.013

86.284

100.036

PVBP

0.04069

0.03150

0.03585

7. A is correct. The Macaulay duration for Bond Three is 3.6747. The Macaulay
duration for Bond Four is 0.5 because there is exposure to interest rate changes
for one-half of the coupon period.

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.

LEARNING MODULE

12

Yield-Based Bond Convexity
and Portfolio Properties
LEARNING OUTCOMES
Mastery

The candidate should be able to:
calculate and interpret convexity and describe the convexity
adjustment
calculate the percentage price change of a bond for a specified
change in yield, given the bondвҖҷs duration and convexity
calculate portfolio duration and convexity and explain the limitations
of these measures

INTRODUCTION
While duration is a linear approximation of the sensitivity of a bondвҖҷs price to changes
in yield, the true relationship between a bondвҖҷs price and its yield-to-maturity is a
curved (convex) line. We introduce convexity as a complementary risk measure to
improve bond price change estimates based on modified duration alone to account
for this non-linear relationship. The convexity adjustment becomes more important
when considering larger moves in yield-to-maturity and longer-maturity bonds. These
lessons will also show how to estimate duration and convexity for a portfolio of bonds,
as well as highlight limitations due to underlying assumptions.
Most of the examples and exhibits used throughout the reading can be downloaded
as a Microsoft Excel workbook. Each worksheet in the workbook is labeled with the
corresponding example or exhibit number in the text.
LEARNING MODULE OVERVIEW
в– 

Convexity is a complementary risk metric that measures the
second-order (non-linear) effect of yield changes on price for
an option-free fixed-rate bond. The convexity adjustment adds to the
linear price estimate provided by modified duration.

1

294

Learning Module 12

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
Yield-Based Bond Convexity and Portfolio Properties

в– 

Convexity is always positive for an option-free fixed-rate bond, such
that estimated price increases from a decline in yields are higher than
duration alone would suggest and estimated price decreases from
an increase in yields are lower than duration alone would suggest.
Therefore, convexity is valuable to investors.

в– 

Convexity has the same relationship with bond features as duration: a
fixed-rate bond will have greater convexity the longer its time-to-maturity, the lower its coupon rate, and the lower its yield-to-maturity.

в– 

Money convexity expresses convexity in terms of currency units or
percent of par for a position in a bond because it is the product of a
bondвҖҷs annual convexity and its full price.

в– 

Portfolio duration and convexity can be calculated (1) as the weighted
average of time to receipt of the aggregate cash flows or (2) by using
the weighted averages of the durations and convexities of the individual bonds that make up the portfolio.

в– 

While the first method is theoretically correct, it is difficult to use in
practice. The second method is commonly used by portfolio managers
but implicitly assumes parallel shifts in the yield curve, which are rare.

LEARNING MODULE SELF-ASSESSMENT
These initial questions are intended to help you gauge your current level
of understanding of the learning module.
1. The annualized convexity of a four-year, 2.8% (semiannual) coupon bond
priced at par at issuance on 1 August 2035 and maturing on 1 August 2039
is closest to:
A. 7.624.
B. 16.413.
C. 65.651.
Solution:
B is correct.

Four-Year, 2.8% Semiannual Bond at Issuance
вҖӢ

Fixed Coupon (%)

2.80

Price (per 100 Par Value)

100

Periods p.a.

2

Yield-to-Maturity (%)

2.8000
вҖӢ

Introduction

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.

295

вҖӢ

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6) = (2) Г— (5)

(7) = Col. 2 Г— (Col. 2
+ 1) Г— Col. 5 Г— (1 +
YTM/2)вҖ“2

Time to
Receipt

Cash Flow

Present
Value

Weight

Time to Receipt
Г— Weight

Convexity of Cash
Flows

1

1.0

1.4

1.380671

0.01381

0.01381

0.02686

2

2.0

1.4

1.361608

0.01362

0.02723

0.07946

3

3.0

1.4

1.342809

0.01343

0.04028

0.15672

4

4.0

1.4

1.324269

0.01324

0.05297

0.25759

5

5.0

1.4

1.305985

0.01306

0.06530

0.38105

6

6.0

1.4

1.287954

0.01288

0.07728

0.52611

7

7.0

1.4

1.270171

0.01270

0.08891

0.69179

8

8.0

101.4

(1)
Period

Annualized Macaulay Duration and Convexity

90.726533

0.90727

7.25812

63.53176

100.0000

1.00000

7.62391

65.65133

вҖӢ

Annualized convexity is 16.41283 and results from the sum of Column 7
(65.65133) divided by the square of the periods per year (two periods per
year: 22 = 4).
2. Identify which of the following statements is true. The convexity adjustment:
A. is always negative for an option-free fixed-rate bond.
B. accounts for the first-order effect of yield changes on a bond.
C. is added to the bond price change estimate provided by modified
duration.
Solution:
C is correct. The convexity adjustment is added to the price change estimate
provided by modified duration for a given change in yield-to-maturity:
вҖӢ12 вҖӢГ— AnnConvexity Г— вҖӢ(О”Yield)вҖӢ2вҖӢ]вҖӢ.вҖӢ
	вҖӢ%О”P вҖӢVвҖӢFullвҖӢ вүҲ (вҲ’ AnnModDur Г— О”Yield ) + вҖӢ[_
A is incorrect because convexity is always positive for an option-free fixedrate bond.
B is incorrect because convexity accounts for the second-order effect of
yield changes on a bondвҖҷs price and duration accounts for the first-order
effect.
Questions 3 and 4 relate to the following information.
An investor holds a GBP50,000,000 position in a 10-year, 3.50% fixed-coupon bond (semiannual) trading at par value. Annualized modified duration is
8.376, and annualized convexity is 81.701. The investor expects interest rates
to decline by 100 bps.
3. The expected percentage change in the price of the bond is closest to:
A. 7.97%.
B. 8.01%.
C. 8.78%.
Solution:
C is correct. The expected price change is calculated as follows:

3.81195

16.41283

296

Learning Module 12

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
Yield-Based Bond Convexity and Portfolio Properties

	вҖӢ%О”P вҖӢVвҖӢFullвҖӢ вүҲ вҖӢ(вҲ’ AnnModDur Г— О”Yield)вҖӢ+ [вҖӢ вҖӢ_12 вҖӢГ— AnnConvexity Г— вҖӢ(О”Yield)вҖӢ2вҖӢ]вҖӢ.вҖӢ
	вҖӢ%О”P вҖӢVвҖӢFullвҖӢ вүҲ вҖӢ(вҲ’ 8.376 Г— вҲ’ 0.01)вҖӢ+ [вҖӢ _
вҖӢ12 вҖӢГ— 81.701 Г— вҖӢ(вҲ’ 0.01)вҖӢ2вҖӢ]вҖӢ.вҖӢ
%О”PVFull вүҲ 0.0878 = 8.78%
4. The addition of money convexity to the estimated change in the value of the
bond position using money duration alone is closest to:
A. GBP204,252.
B. GBP408,503.
C. GBP4,188,220.
Solution:
A is correct. This question is asking for the money convexity adjustment.
First we calculate money convexity:
MoneyCon = AnnConvexity Г— PVFull.
MoneyCon = 81.701 Г— GBP50,000,000.
MoneyCon = GBP4,085,033,604.
Then we calculate the money convexity adjustment:
вҖӢ12 вҖӢГ— MoneyConvexity Г— вҖӢ(О”Yield)вҖӢ2вҖӢ]вҖӢ.вҖӢ
	вҖӢMoneyConv . Adjustment вүҲ [вҖӢ _
	вҖӢMoneyConv . Adjustment вүҲ [вҖӢ _
вҖӢ12 вҖӢГ— GBP4, 085, 033, 604 Г— вҖӢ(вҲ’ 0.01)вҖӢ2вҖӢ]вҖӢ.вҖӢ
MoneyConv.Adjustment вүҲ GBP204,252.
5. A EUR100 million bond portfolio contains the following bonds:
вҖӢ

Market Value

Annualized
Modified
Duration

Annualized
Convexity

2.80%

EUR40,000,000

2.858

9.752

3.50%

EUR60,000,000

8.376

81.701

Maturity
(yrs.)

YTM (%)

A

3

B

10

Bond

вҖӢ

The expected percentage price change of the bond portfolio given a 50 bp
increase in yield-to-maturity is closest to:
A. 3.018%.
B. 3.085%.
C. 3.151%.
Solution:
A is correct. The weights of Bond A and Bond B are 40% and 60%, respectively. As a result, the portfolio weighted-average duration and convexity
measures are 6.169 and 52.921, respectively. The expected portfolio percentage price change given a 50 bp increase in YTM is calculated as follows:
вҖӢ12 вҖӢГ— AnnConvexity Г— вҖӢ(О”Yield)вҖӢ2вҖӢ]вҖӢ.вҖӢ
	вҖӢ%О”P вҖӢVвҖӢFullвҖӢ вүҲ вҖӢ(вҲ’ AnnModDur Г— О”Yield)вҖӢ+ [вҖӢ _

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
Bond Convexity and Convexity Adjustment

297

	вҖӢ%О”P вҖӢVвҖӢFullвҖӢ вүҲ вҖӢ(вҲ’ 6.169 Г— 0.005)вҖӢ+ [вҖӢ _
вҖӢ12 вҖӢГ— 52.921 Г— вҖӢ(0.005)вҖӢ2вҖӢ]вҖӢ.вҖӢ
%О”PVFull вүҲ вҲ’3.018%
6. Using weighted-average duration and convexity measures to estimate bond
portfolio interest rate risk:
A. is difficult in practice.
B. is the theoretically correct approach.
C. assumes a parallel shift in the yield curve.
Solution:
C is correct. Using the weighted-average duration and convexity measures
to estimate bond portfolio interest rate risk is easy in practice, but it is not
the theoretically correct approach (using the weighted average of time to
receipt of the aggregate cash flows is theoretically correct). It does, however,
implicitly assume a parallel shift in the yield curve.

BOND CONVEXITY AND CONVEXITY ADJUSTMENT
calculate and interpret convexity and describe the convexity
adjustment
Interest rate risk, or the sensitivity of a bondвҖҷs price to changes in yield, is an important concept used to analyze fixed-income exposures. As a key risk metric, modified
duration measures the first-order (linear) effect on a bondвҖҷs price change given a
yield-to-maturity change. Convexity is a complementary risk metric that measures
the second-order (non-linear) effect of yield changes on price for an option-free
fixed-rate bond, as shown in Exhibit 1.

Exhibit 1: Convexity of an Option-Free Fixed-Rate Bond
Price

Convex priceвҖ“yield curve
Estimated change due to convexity
Estimated change due to duration

Line tangent to
the priceвҖ“yield curve
Yield-to-maturity

2

298

Learning Module 12

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
Yield-Based Bond Convexity and Portfolio Properties

The true relationship between a bondвҖҷs price and its yield-to-maturity is the curved
(convex) line that shows the actual bond price given its market discount rate. Duration
(i.e., money duration) estimates the change in the bond price along the straight line
tangent to the curved line. For small yield-to-maturity changes, there is little difference between the lines.
However, for larger yield changes, the difference becomes significant and duration
alone is an insufficient risk measure. In such cases, a proper assessment requires
capturing the non-linear price effect of convexity. By considering duration and convexity metrics together for relatively large yield changes, the estimated bond prices
are substantially closer to the actual bond prices. That is, when including convexity,
bond prices rise more when yields decrease and fall less when yields increase than
when estimated using duration alone.
As shown in Equation 1, convexity adds to the estimate of the percentage (full)
price change provided when using modified duration by itself, which was used in
prior lessons.
вҖӢ12 вҖӢГ— AnnConvexity Г— вҖӢ(О”Yield)вҖӢ2вҖӢ]вҖӢ.вҖӢ	
	вҖӢ%О”P вҖӢVвҖӢFullвҖӢ вүҲ (вҲ’ AnnModDur Г— О”Yield ) + вҖӢ[_

(1)

The first expression in parentheses is the effect from modified duration. The expression
in brackets is the convexity adjustment: the annual convexity statistic, AnnConvexity,
times one-half times the change in the yield-to-maturity squared. This term is always
positive for an option-free fixed-rate bond, so, as noted, the bond price is higher for
either an increase or decrease in yield (see Exhibit 1).
Similar to Macaulay and modified durations, AnnConvexity can be calculated in
several ways: (1) using a Microsoft Excel spreadsheet, (2) using an approximation
method, and (3) using a closed-form equation derived from calculus. We will now
demonstrate methods 1 and 2.
Consider once again BRWAвҖҷs five-year, 3.2% (semiannual) coupon bond priced
at par for settlement on 15 October 2025 and maturity on 15 October 2030. Exhibit
2 is an interactive spreadsheet in the downloadable Microsoft Excel workbook that
shows the calculation of AnnConvexity for this bond; notice that it is very similar to
the one used to calculate duration. The difference is the inclusion of a new column
(Col. 7) for the following operation (where CF means cash flow) to calculate convexity:
(Time to receipt of CF) Г— (Time to receipt of CF + 1) Г— (Weight of CF) Г— (1 +
Periodic YTM)(вҖ“Periods per year).
Note that the intermediate result of multiplying the first two terms introduces
non-linearity (Time to receipt of CF2). Dividing the sum of Column 7 (96.95578) by
periods per year squared (22=4) results in an annualized convexity (AnnConvexity)
statistic of 24.2389.
Exhibit 2: Convexity Calculation for an Option-Free Fixed-Rate Bond

BRWA Corporation Five-Year, 3.2% Semiannual Bond at
Issuance
Principal

Fixed Coupon (%)
Periods p.a.

Price (per 100 Par Value)
Yield-to-Maturity (%)

$300,000,000
3.20
2
100
3.20

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
Bond Convexity and Convexity Adjustment

299

Col. 5

Col. 7 = Col.
2 Г— (Col. 2
+ 1) Г— Col.
Col. 6 = Col.
5 Г— (1 +
2 Г— Col. 5
YTM/2)-2

Present
Value

Weight

Time to
Receipt Г—
Weight

Convexity
of Cash
Flows

1.6

1.5748

0.0157

0.0157

0.0305

1.6

1.5500

0.0155

0.0310

0.0901

3.0

1.6

1.5256

0.0153

0.0458

0.1774

4

4.0

1.6

1.5016

0.0150

0.0601

0.2909

5

5.0

1.6

1.4779

0.0148

0.0739

0.4295

6

6.0

1.6

1.4546

0.0145

0.0873

0.5919

7

7.0

1.6

1.4317

0.0143

0.1002

0.7767

8

8.0

1.6

1.4092

0.0141

0.1127

0.9829

9

9.0

1.6

1.3870

0.0139

0.1248

1.2093

10

10.0

101.6

Col. 1

Col. 2

Col. 3

Col. 4

Period

Time to Receipt

Cash
Flow

1

1.0

2

2.0

3

Annualized Macaulay Duration and Convexity

86.6875

0.8669

8.6688

92.3766

100.0000

1.0000

9.3203

96.9558

Exhibit 2 can also be viewed as a spreadsheet on the candidate learning ecosystem
online in the downloadable Microsoft Excel workbook.
Alternatively, Equation 2 can be used to approximate annualized convexity
(ApproxCon). This approach is useful for bonds with uncertain cash flows, such as
those with contingency features and default risk, which will be explored in later lessons.
Note that this equation uses the same inputs as approximating modified duration.
(вҖӢ P вҖӢVвҖӢвҲ’)вҖӢ вҖӢ+ вҖӢ(P вҖӢVвҖӢ+вҖӢ)вҖӢвҲ’ вҖӢ[2 Г— вҖӢ(P вҖӢVвҖӢ0вҖӢ)вҖӢ]вҖӢ
вҖҜвҖҜвҖҜ
вҖҜвҖҜвҖӢ.вҖӢ	
	вҖӢApproxCon = _____________________
вҖӢ
вҖӢ(О”Yield)вҖӢ2вҖӢГ— вҖӢ(P вҖӢV0вҖӢ вҖӢ)вҖӢ

(2)

For BRWAвҖҷs bond, first raise the annual yield-to-maturity by 5 bps, from 3.20% to
3.25%, and determine PV+. Next, lower it by 5 bps, to 3.15%, and determine PVвҖ“. These
are the new full prices (original price is PV0 = 100.00). Using ExcelвҖҷs PRICE function,
PRICE(settlement, maturity, rate, yield, redemption, frequency, [basis]),

we have the following:
PV+ = PRICE(DATE(2025,10,15),DATE(2030,10,15),0.032,0.0325,100,2,0)
= 99.770965.
PVвҖ“ = PRICE(DATE(2025,10,15),DATE(2030,10,15),0.032,0.0315,100,2,0)
= 100.229641.
Applying Equation 2, ApproxCon is estimated to be 24.23896, which is a very close
approximation to the bondвҖҷs AnnConvexity of 24.23895 we calculated in Exhibit 2.
100.229641 + 99.770965 вҲ’ вҖӢ(2 Г— 100.00)вҖӢ
вҖӢ 0.0005 вҖӢ вҖӢГ— 100.00

вҖҜвҖҜвҖҜ
вҖӢ = 24.23896.вҖӢ
	вҖӢApproxCon = ____________________________
вҖӢвҖҜвҖҜвҖҜ
(
)2

4.6601

24.2389

300

Learning Module 12

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
Yield-Based Bond Convexity and Portfolio Properties

Bond features that lead to greater convexity are the same as for duration. A fixed-rate
bond will have greater convexity:
в– 

the longer its time-to-maturity,

в– 

the lower its coupon rate, and

в– 

the lower its yield-to-maturity.

Another factor is the dispersion of cash flows, meaning the degree to which payments are spread out over time. For two bonds with the same duration, the one with
the greater dispersion of cash flows has greater convexity. The positive attributes of
convexity for an investor are shown in Exhibit 3.

Exhibit 3: Positive Attributes of Bond Convexity on an Option-Free Bond
Price

More convex bond

Less convex bond

Line tangent to the
priceвҖ“yield curve

Yield-to-maturity

The two bonds depicted in Exhibit 3 are assumed to have the same price, maturity,
yield-to-maturity, and modified duration, so they share the same line tangent to
their priceвҖ“yield curves. The benefit of greater convexity arises when their yields
change significantly. For the same decrease in yield-to-maturity, the more convex
bond appreciates more in price, while for the same increase in yield-to-maturity, the
more convex bond depreciates less in price. Consequently, the more convex bond
outperforms the less convex bond in both falling and rising yield environments, so it
is less risky for investors.
This conclusion assumes the difference in convexity is not reflected in the price of
the more convex bond. If it is priced in, the more convex bond would have a higher
price (and lower yield-to-maturity). The key point is that convexity is valuable to
investors for risk reduction, so they must pay for it.
EXAMPLE 1

Duration and Convexity of 30-Year Romanian Bond
A 30-year bond issued by the government of Romania has a coupon rate of
4.625% (paid annually) and currently trades at a yield-to-maturity of 4.75% on
15 October 2025, with a maturity date of 15 October 2055.
1. Use ExcelвҖҷs PRICE function to calculate ApproxModDur and
ApproxCon using a 5 bp increase and decrease in yield-to-maturity.
2. Compare and interpret the duration and convexity measures of the
30-year Romanian bond and BRWAвҖҷs 5-year bond.

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
Bond Convexity and Convexity Adjustment

To find ApproxModDur and ApproxCon, we must first calculate PV0 and
then, using a 5 bp increase and decrease in YTM, calculate PV+ and PVвҖ“:
PV0 = PRICE(DATE(2025,10,15),DATE(2055,10,15),0.04625,0.0475,100,1,0)
= 98.022448.
PV+ = PRICE(DATE(2025,10,15),DATE(2055,10,15),0.04625,0.0480,100,1,0)
= 97.247386.
PVвҖ“ = PRICE(DATE(2025,10,15),DATE(2055,10,15),0.04625,0.0470,100,1,0)
= 98.806567.
98.806567 вҲ’ 97.247386

вҖҜвҖҜ
вҖӢ = 15.90637.вҖӢ
	вҖӢApproxModDur = __________________
вҖӢвҖҜвҖҜ
2 Г— (вҖӢ 0.0005)вҖӢГ— 98.022448
98.806567 + 97.247386 вҲ’ вҖӢ(2 Г— 98.022448)вҖӢ
вҖӢ 0.0005 вҖӢ вҖӢГ— 98.022448

вҖҜвҖҜвҖҜ
вҖӢ = 369.58881.вҖӢ
	вҖӢApproxCon = ______________________________
вҖӢвҖҜвҖҜвҖҜ
(
)2
вҖӢ

Duration and Convexity Comparison: Romanian and BRWA Bonds
вҖӢ

вҖӢ

Bond

Maturity
(Years)

Coupon (%)

YTM (%)

ApproxModDur

ApproxCon

Romanian

30

4.625
Annual Pay

4.75

15.90637

369.64203

BRWA

5

3.20
Semi-Annual

3.20

4.58676

24.23896

вҖӢ

The duration and convexity of the Romanian bond are significantly higher
than BRWAвҖҷs bond primarily due to its much longer time-to-maturity (30 years
versus 5 years), which outweighs the Romanian bondвҖҷs higher coupon rate and
YTM, features that decrease duration and convexity.
QUESTION SET
Questions 1вҖ“5 relate to the following information.
вҖӢ

Bond

Issuance
Date

Maturity

Annual Pay
Coupon (%)

YTM (%)

Bond X

7/15/25

7/15/34

2.25

2.25

Bond Y

7/15/25

7/15/35

5.33

2.34

вҖӢ

1. Calculate the modified duration and convexity for Bond X at issuance.
Solution:

вҖӢ

Bond X
Fixed Coupon (%)

2.25

Price (per 100 Par Value)

100

Periods p.a.

1

Yield-to-Maturity (%)

2.25
вҖӢ

301

302

Learning Module 12

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
Yield-Based Bond Convexity and Portfolio Properties

вҖӢ

Col. 6 = Col.
2 Г— Col. 5

Col. 7 = Col. 2
Г— (Col. 2 + 1)
Г— Col. 5 Г— (1 +
YTM)вҖ“1

Col. 1

Col. 2

Col. 3

Col. 4

Col. 5

Period

Time to
Receipt

Cash
Flow

Present Value

Weight

Time to
Receipt Г—
Weight

Convexity of
Cash Flows

1

1.0

2.25

2.200489

0.02200

0.02200

0.04304

2

2.0

2.25

2.152067

0.02152

0.04304

0.12628

3

3.0

2.25

2.104711

0.02105

0.06314

0.24701

4

4.0

2.25

2.058398

0.02058

0.08234

0.40262

5

5.0

2.25

2.013103

0.02013

0.10066

0.59064

6

6.0

2.25

1.968805

0.01969

0.11813

0.80870

7

7.0

2.25

1.925481

0.01925

0.13478

1.05454

8

8.0

2.25

1.883111

0.01883

0.15065

1.32601

9

9.0

102.25

83.693835

0.83694

7.53245

73.66694

100.0000

1.00000

8.24718

78.26579

8.06571

вҖ”

Annualized Macaulay Duration and Convexity
Modified Duration

8.24718

78.26579
вҖӢ

2. Calculate ApproxModDur and ApproxCon for Bond Y using a 5 bp increase
and decrease in the yield-to-maturity.
Solution:

To find ApproxModDur and ApproxCon for Bond Y, we must first calculate
PV0, PV+, and PVвҖ“.
PV0 = PRICE(DATE(2025,7,15),DATE(2035,7,15),0.0533,0.0234,100,1,0)
= 126.386358.
PV+ = PRICE(DATE(2025,7,15),DATE(2035,7,15),0.0533,0.0239,100,1,0)
= 125.877943.
PVвҖ“ = PRICE(DATE(2025,7,15),DATE(2035,7,15),0.0533,0.0229,100,1,0)
= 126.897325.
126.897325 вҲ’ 125.877943

вҖҜвҖҜ
вҖӢ = 8.06560.вҖӢ
	вҖӢApproxModDur = ___________________
вҖӢвҖҜвҖҜ
2 Г— вҖӢ(0.0005)вҖӢГ— 126.386358
126.897325 + 125.877943 вҲ’ вҖӢ(2 Г— 126.386358)вҖӢ
вҖӢ 0.0005 вҖӢ вҖӢГ— 126.386358

вҖӢвҖҜвҖҜвҖҜвҖҜ
	вҖӢApproxCon = ________________________________
вҖҜвҖҜвҖҜ
вҖӢ = 80.76704.вҖӢ
(
)2
3. Compare and interpret the risk measures from Questions 1 and 2 relative to
a small anticipated change in yield-to-maturity.
Solution:

For a small change in YTM, modified duration is a reasonable estimate of
the price change risk of a bond. Since the modified duration (or ApproxModDur) values of Bond X and Bond Y are virtually identical (8.06571 and
8.06560, respectively), the estimated price change based on a small change
in YTM (either positive or negative) would be nearly identical for each bond.

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
Bond Risk and Return Using Duration and Convexity

303

4. Compare and interpret the risk measures from Questions 1 and 2 relative to
a large anticipated change in yield-to-maturity.
Solution:

For a large change in YTM, duration alone does not capture the expected
price change of a bond. The convexity adjustment accounts for the non-linear nature of the relationship of price to YTM. Since both bonds have virtually the same duration, the higher convexity of Bond Y should result in a
smaller percentage drop given a large increase in YTM and a larger percentage increase given a large decrease in YTM. In either case, Bond Y should
perform better than Bond X for a large change in YTM.
5. Compare and interpret each of the following features for its effect on the
convexity of Bond X versus Bond Y:
a. Maturity
b. Coupon rate
c. YTM

Solution:
a. Bond Y has a longer maturity than Bond X (10 years versus 9 years),
which would increase Bond YвҖҷs convexity relative to Bond X.
b. Bond X has a lower coupon rate compared to Bond Y (2.25% versus
5.33%), which would increase Bond XвҖҷs convexity relative to Bond Y.
c. Bond X has a lower YTM compared to Bond Y (2.25% versus 2.34%),
which would increase Bond XвҖҷs convexity relative to Bond Y.

BOND RISK AND RETURN USING DURATION AND
CONVEXITY
calculate the percentage price change of a bond for a specified
change in yield, given the bondвҖҷs duration and convexity
We now show how to estimate the percentage price change of a bond for a specified
yield change, given the bondвҖҷs duration and convexity. As we will show, such an estimate is substantially closer to the bondвҖҷs actual price change than if estimated using
duration alone, allowing for more efficient risk management.
Continuing with our focus on BRWAвҖҷs five-year, 3.2% (semiannual) coupon bond
priced at par for settlement on 15 October 2025 and maturity on 15 October 2030, if
its yield-to-maturity changes by Вұ100 bps from 3.20%, then the actual prices, using
ExcelвҖҷs PRICE function, would be as follows:
PV+ = PRICE(DATE(2025,10,15),DATE(2030,10,15),0.032,0.0420,100,2,0)
= 95.53212.
PVвҖ“ = PRICE(DATE(2025,10,15),DATE(2030,10,15),0.032,0.0220,100,2,0)
= 104.71035.

3

304

Learning Module 12

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
Yield-Based Bond Convexity and Portfolio Properties

So, the actual priceвҖ“yield relationship for this bond is as follows:
в– 
в– 

100 bp increase in yield (4.20%): Price = 95.53212; %вҲҶPVFull = вҖ“4.46788%.

100 bp decrease in yield (2.20%): Price = 104.71035; %вҲҶPVFull = 4.71035%.

The modified duration for this bond was previously found to be 4.58676, so a 100 bp
increase (decrease) in yield-to-maturity results in %вҲҶPVFull вүҲ вҖ“4.58676% (4.58676%).
We now show the enhanced precision and risk reduction achieved by adding the
convexity adjustment to the duration estimate when determining the BRWA bondвҖҷs
percentage price changes. Using Equation 1 and the AnnConvexity metric, for Вұ100
bp changes in yield-to-maturity (from 3.20%), we have the following:
%вҲҶPVFull вүҲ (вҖ“4.58676 Г— 0.0100) + [ВҪ Г— 24.23895 Г— (0.0100)2] = вҖ“4.46556%.

%вҲҶPVFull вүҲ (вҖ“4.58676 Г— вҖ“0.0100) + [ВҪ Г— 24.23895 Г— (вҖ“0.0100)2] = 4.70795%.
Exhibit 4 compares the estimated percentage changes in BRWAвҖҷs bond prices for Вұ100
bp changes in yield using duration alone and using duration plus convexity against
the exact changes from ExcelвҖҷs PRICE function. It is clear that enhanced precision is
achieved by adding the convexity adjustment, because the percentage price difference
is less than Вј of a basis point by adding convexity versus about 12 bps with duration
alone. Note that this difference would be substantially greater for larger changes in
yield or for longer-maturity or lower-coupon bonds.

Exhibit 4: Using Duration and Convexity to Estimate Bond Price Changes

Difference
from Actual
Change

Estimated
%вҲҶPVFull
Using
ModDur +
Convexity

вҖ“4.58676

вҖ“0.11887

вҖ“4.46556

0.00232

4.58676

вҖ“0.12359

4.70795

вҖ“0.00239

Actual
%вҲҶPVFull

Estimated
%вҲҶPVFull
Using
ModDur

+ 100 bps

вҖ“4.46788

вҖ“ 100 bps

4.71035

Change in
Bond Yield

Difference
from Actual
Change

Recall that money duration indicates the first-order effect on the full price of a bond
in currency units given a change in yield-to-maturity. Money convexity (MoneyCon)
captures the second-order effect in currency terms and is the annual convexity multiplied by the full price, as in Equation 3.
MoneyCon = AnnConvexity Г— PVFull.

(3)

Similar to estimating the percentage change in a bondвҖҷs full price, MoneyDur and
MoneyCon are combined to achieve a more accurate, thus less risky, estimate of the
change in a bondвҖҷs full price, as shown in Equation 4.
вҖӢ12 вҖӢГ— MoneyCon Г— вҖӢ(О”Yield)вҖӢ2вҖӢ]вҖӢ.вҖӢ	
	вҖӢО”P вҖӢVвҖӢFullвҖӢ вүҲ вҲ’ вҖӢ(MoneyDur Г— О”Yield)вҖӢ+ [вҖӢ _

(4)

For a money convexity example, consider again BRWAвҖҷs five-year, 3.2% semiannual
coupon bond, settling 15 October 2025, maturing 15 October 2030, and yielding
3.2%вҖ”thus, priced at par. We saw previously that annual modified duration and annual
convexity for this bond are 4.58676 and 24.23895, respectively.
Suppose the investor has a position in the bond with a par value of USD100 million
and the yield-to-maturity increases by 100 bps. We saw earlier that the bondвҖҷs price
declines to 95.53212, so the market value of the position decreases to $95,532,116 (=
$100,000,000 Г— 0.9553212), a decline of $4,467,884.
Estimating the market value change using MoneyDur alone results in a larger
decline, $4,586,759 (= $458,675,875 Г— 0.0100), a difference of $118,875.

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
Bond Risk and Return Using Duration and Convexity

However, using Equation 3, the MoneyCon for this position is $2,423,894,503 (=
24.23895 Г— $100,000,000), and if we apply Equation 4, which uses both MoneyDur and
MoneyCon, to estimate the market value change, the result is a decline of вҖ“$4,465,564,
as follows:
вҖӢ12 вҖӢГ— 2, 423, 894, 503 Г— (вҖӢ 0.01)вҖӢ2вҖӢ]вҖӢ.вҖӢ
	вҖӢвҲ’ $4, 465, 564 вүҲ вҲ’ вҖӢ($458, 675, 875 Г— 0.01)вҖӢ+ вҖӢ[_

By using both MoneyDur and MoneyCon, the difference in the estimated versus the
actual changes in bond position value is only $2,320. Exhibit 5 summarizes these
results and shows the estimated and actual changes in position value for a 100 bp
decrease in yield.

Exhibit 5: Using Money Duration and Money Convexity to Estimate Bond
Price Changes

Actual
вҲҶPVFull

Estimated
вҲҶPVFull
Using
MoneyDur

Difference
from
Actual
Change

Estimated
вҲҶPVFull Using
MoneyDur +
MoneyCon

Difference
from
Actual
Change

+ 100 BPS

вҖ“$4,467,884

вҖ“$4,586,759

$118,875

вҖ“$4,465,564

вҖ“$2,320

вҖ“ 100 BPS

$4,710,348

$4,586,759

вҖ“$123,590

4,707,953

вҖ“$2,395

Change in
Bond Yield

KNOWLEDGE CHECK
An investor holds a position in five-year, zero-coupon Federal Republic
of Germany bonds settling 11 May 2025 and maturing 11 April 2030.
The yield-to-maturity is вҖ“0.72%, stated as an effective annual rate on an Act/
Act basis. There are five annual periods, and settlement is 30 days into the
365-day year.
1. Calculate the full price of the bond per 100 of par value.
Solution:

Because ExcelвҖҷs PRICE function does not work for negative yields, the
equation for PV of a zero-coupon bond must be used. There are five annual
periods, settlement is 30 days into the 365-day year, and because 1 + r = 1
+ (вҖ“0.0072) = 0.9928, the full price of the bond is 103.6175 per 100 of par
value:
вҖӢ вҖӢ
вҖӢ
	вҖӢP вҖӢVвҖӢ0вҖӢ = [вҖӢ _
5 вҖӢ]вҖӢГ— вҖӢ(0.9928)вҖӢ365 вҖӢ

100
вҖӢ(0.9928)вҖӢ вҖӢ

30
_

PV0 = 103.6175.
2. Calculate ApproxModDur and ApproxCon using a 1 bp increase and decrease in the yield-to-maturity.
Solution:

PV+ = 103.5662, and PVвҖ“ = 103.6689:
вҖӢ вҖӢ
вҖӢ
	вҖӢP вҖӢV+вҖӢ вҖӢ = [вҖӢ _
5 вҖӢ]вҖӢГ— вҖӢ(0.9929)вҖӢ365 вҖӢ

100
вҖӢ(0.9929)вҖӢ вҖӢ

PV+ = 103.5662.

30
_

305

306

Learning Module 12

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
Yield-Based Bond Convexity and Portfolio Properties

	вҖӢP вҖӢVвҲ’вҖӢ вҖӢ = [вҖӢ _
вҖӢ
вҖӢ вҖӢГ— вҖӢ(0.9927)вҖӢвҖӢ365 вҖӢвҖӢ
5]
100
вҖӢ(0.9927)вҖӢ вҖӢ

30
_

PVвҲ’ = 103.6689.
The approximate modified duration is 4.9535:
103.6689 вҲ’ 103.5662

вҖҜвҖҜ
вҖҜвҖҜвҖӢ = 4.9535.вҖӢ
	вҖӢApproxModDur = _________________
вҖӢ2 Г— (
вҖӢ 0.0001)вҖӢГ— 103.6175
The approximate convexity is 29.918:
103.6689 + 103.5662 вҲ’ (вҖӢ 2 Г— 103.6175)вҖӢ
вҖӢ 0.0001 вҖӢ вҖӢГ— 103.6175

вҖҜвҖҜвҖҜ
вҖӢ = 29.918.вҖӢ
	вҖӢApproxCon = ___________________________
вҖӢвҖҜвҖҜвҖҜ
(
)2
3. Calculate the estimated convexity-adjusted percentage price change resulting from a 100 bp increase in the yield-to-maturity.
Solution:

The convexity-adjusted percentage price change from a 100 bp increase in
yield-to-maturity is estimated as вҖ“4.80391%. Modified duration alone estimates the change as вҖ“4.9535%. The convexity adjustment adds 14.96 bps.
вҖӢ12 вҖӢГ— AnnConvexity Г— вҖӢ(О”Yield)вҖӢ2вҖӢ]вҖӢ.вҖӢ
	вҖӢ%О”P вҖӢVвҖӢFullвҖӢ вүҲ (вҲ’ AnnModDur Г— О”Yield ) + вҖӢ[_
	вҖӢ%О”P вҖӢVвҖӢFullвҖӢ вүҲ (вҲ’ 4.9535 + 0.01 ) + вҖӢ[_
вҖӢ12 вҖӢГ— 29.918 Г— вҖӢ(0.01)вҖӢ2вҖӢ]вҖӢ
%О”PVFull вүҲ вҲ’0.048039 = вҲ’4.8039%.
4. Compare the estimated percentage price change with the actual change,
assuming the yield-to-maturity jumps 100 bps, to 0.28%, on the settlement
date.
Solution:

The new full price if the yield-to-maturity jumps from вҖ“0.72% to 0.28% on
the settlement date is 98.634349:
вҖӢ
вҖӢ вҖӢГ— вҖӢ(1.0028)вҖӢвҖӢ365 вҖӢвҖӢ
	вҖӢP вҖӢVвҖӢFullвҖӢ = [вҖӢ _
5]
100
вҖӢ(1.0028)вҖӢ вҖӢ

30
_

PVFull = 98.634349
The actual percentage change in the bond price is вҖ“4.80920%
(98.634349/103.617526 вҲ’ 1). The convexity-adjusted estimate is вҖ“4.80391%,
whereas the estimated change using modified duration alone is вҖ“4.95350%.

QUESTION SET
Questions 1вҖ“4 relate to the following information.
An investor purchases a вӮ¬10 million semi-annual 3.75% coupon bond with a
yield-to-maturity of 2.95%, settling 30 June 2025 and maturing 30 June 2032.
1. Calculate ApproxModDur and ApproxCon for the bond using a 1 bp increase and decrease in yield-to-maturity.
Solution:

PV+ = PRICE(DATE(2025,6,30),DATE(2032,6,30),0.0295,0.0296,100,2,0)

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
Portfolio Duration and Convexity

307

= 99.937.
PVвҖ“ = PRICE(DATE(2025,6,30),DATE(2032,6,30),0.0295,0.0294,100,2,0)
= 100.063.
100.063 вҲ’ 99.937

вҖҜвҖҜ
вҖӢ = 6.283.вҖӢ
	вҖӢApproxModDur = ______________
вҖӢвҖҜвҖҜ
2 Г— вҖӢ(0.0001)вҖӢГ— 100
100.063 + 99.937 вҲ’ вҖӢ(2 Г— 100)вҖӢ
вҖӢ 0.0001 вҖӢ вҖӢГ— 100

	вҖӢApproxCon = _____________________
вҖӢвҖҜвҖҜвҖҜ
вҖҜвҖҜвҖӢ = 44.965.вҖӢ
(
)2
2. Calculate MoneyDur and MoneyCon for the bond position using the results
from Question 1.
Solution:

MoneyDur вүҲ 6.283 Г— EUR10,000,000 = EUR62,829,180.
MoneyCon вүҲ 44.965 Г— EUR10,000,000 = EUR449,647,660.
3. Calculate the estimated price change in the investorвҖҷs position in the bond
using MoneyDur and MoneyCon for a 50 bp decrease in yield-to-maturity.
Solution:

О”PVFull вүҲ вҖ“(EUR62,829,180 Г— вҖ“0.005) + [ВҪ Г— EUR449,647,660 Г— (вҖ“0.005)2]
= EUR319,767.
4. Calculate the difference between the estimated price change and the actual
price change given a 50 bp yield-to-maturity decrease.
Solution:

PVFull = PRICE(DATE(2025,6,30),DATE(2032,6,30),0.0295,0.0345,100,2,0)
= 103.198.
The actual increase in the bond price is 3.1984%:
О”PVFull = 3.1984% Г— $10,000,000 = EUR319,840.
The difference between the actual and the estimated price change is EUR73
(= 319,840 вҖ“ 319,767).

PORTFOLIO DURATION AND CONVEXITY
calculate portfolio duration and convexity and explain the limitations
of these measures
Just as duration and convexity provide measures of the interest rate risk of a single
bond, these metrics can also be used to measure the interest rate risk of a portfolio of
bonds. There are two ways to calculate the duration and convexity of a bond portfolio:
1. Using the weighted average of time to receipt of the aggregate cash flows

4

308

Learning Module 12

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
Yield-Based Bond Convexity and Portfolio Properties

2. Using the weighted averages of the durations and convexities of the individual bonds that make up the portfolio
The first method is the theoretically correct approach, but it is difficult to use
in practice. Our focus will be the second method since it is commonly used by
fixed-income portfolio managers. We will also highlight its limitations.
Suppose an institutional investor holds a two-bond portfolio consisting of $50
million par value each of the BRWA five-year bond and a government of Romania
30-year bond, with details as shown in Exhibit 6. Assume that both bonds are denominated in US dollars.
Exhibit 6: Inputs for Determining Portfolio Duration and Convexity

Bond

Maturity
(Years)

Coupon
(%)

Price

Yield
(%)

Duration

Convexity

BRWA

5

3.200

100.000

3.200

4.58676

24.23896

Romania

30

4.625

98.022

4.750

15.90637

369.64203

Bond

Par Value

Market Value

Portfolio Weight

BRWA

50,000,000

50,000,000

0.5050

Romanian

50,000,000

49,011,224

0.4950

The total market value for the portfolio is $99,011,224, and the portfolio is nearly
evenly weighted in terms of market value between the two bonds. As noted previously, duration and convexity for a portfolio are calculated as the weighted average
of the statistics for the individual bonds, with the shares of overall portfolio market
value as the weights. This weighted average approximates the theoretically correct
portfolio duration and convexity and becomes more accurate when differences in the
yields-to-maturity on the bonds are smaller and when the yield curve is flat.
Given the portfolio weights in this simple example, portfolio duration and convexity are calculated as follows:
Weighted-average modified duration = (4.58676 Г— 0.5050) + (15.90637 Г— 0.4950)
= 10.19004.
Weighted-average convexity = (24.23896 Г— 0.5050) + (369.64203 Г— 0.4950)
= 195.21581.
The main advantage of this weighted-average approach is that it is easily used as a
measure of interest rate risk. For instance, if yields-to-maturity on each of the bonds
in the portfolio increase by 100 bps, then the estimated decline in the portfolio value
is 9.214%.
%вҲҶPVFull вүҲ (вҖ“10.19004 Г— 0.0100) + [ВҪ Г— 195.21581 Г— (0.0100)2] = вҖ“9.21396%.

However, this approach also comes with a limitation: These measures of portfolio
duration and convexity implicitly assume that yields of all maturities change by the
same amount in the same direction, a parallel shift in the yield curve. In reality, pure
parallel shifts are rare; rather, we frequently observe a steepening, flattening, or even
twisting yield curve.

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
Portfolio Duration and Convexity

EXAMPLE 2

Portfolio Duration and Convexity
An institutional investor considers adding a new USD50 million par value position
in a 10-year US Treasury bond to its existing portfolio of BRWA and government
of Romania bonds. The relevant data are shown in Exhibit 7.
вҖӢ

Exhibit 7: Inputs for Determining Portfolio Duration and Convexity
вҖӢ

вҖӢ

Bond

Maturity
Coupon
(Years) (%)
Price

BRWA

5

3.200

Yield
(%)
Duration

Convexity

100.000 3.200

4.58676

24.23896

Romanian

30

4.625

98.022 4.750

15.90637

369.64203

US
Treasury

10

1.500

98.168 1.700

9.23693

93.87376

вҖӢ

вҖӢ

Bond

Par Value (USD)

Market Value
(USD)

BRWA

50,000,000

50,000,000

Romania

50,000,000

49,011,224

0.33094

US
Treasury

50,000,000

49,083,948

0.33144

Portfolio Weight
0.33762

вҖӢ

1. Calculate the weighted-average duration and convexity for the proposed
portfolio.
Solution:

Given the data in Exhibit 7, the weighted-average modified duration and
convexity are calculated as follows:
Weighted-average modified duration = (4.58676 Г— 0.33762) + (15.90637 Г—
0.33094) + (9.23693 Г— 0.33144)
= 9.87415.
Weighted-average convexity = (24.23896 Г— 0.33762) + (369.64203 Г— 0.33094)
+ (93.87376 Г— 0.33144)
= 161.62749.
2. Compare and interpret duration and convexity for the proposed portfolio
versus the current portfolio.
Solution:

Adding the US Treasury position would decrease both the portfolio duration
(from 10.19004 to 9.87415) and convexity (from 195.21581 to 161.62749).
The reduction in duration would reduce the price risk of the portfolio
against an upward parallel shift in the yield curve, but due to the lower convexity, this reduction in risk would be lessened for large shifts.

309

310

Learning Module 12

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
Yield-Based Bond Convexity and Portfolio Properties

3. Recommend whether the US Treasury bond position should be added if the
investor expects a 100 bp parallel shift downward in yields.
Solution:

Given an expected 100 bp parallel shift down in yields, the investor should
not add the position in US Treasury bonds. Adding the position lowers both
the portfolio duration and convexity, which would also reduce the expected
increase in the value of the portfolio. Given the investorвҖҷs yield curve view, it
should seek to increase both portfolio duration and convexity.

QUESTION SET
Questions 1вҖ“4 relate to the following information.
An investor purchases EUR10 million par value of a 5-year, zero-coupon bond
and a 10-year, fixed-rate semiannual coupon bond. Details of the bonds are
shown below.

Two-Bond Portfolio
вҖӢ

Bond

Maturity Coupon
(Years) (%)
Price

YTM
(%)
Duration

Convexity

Zero

5

0.00

83.18777 3.750

4.81928

27.87052

Semiannual

10

5.50

105.91556 4.750

7.71210

72.54897

вҖӢ

1. Calculate the weighted-average modified duration for the portfolio.
Solution:

The market value of the bonds are as follows:
Zero-coupon: вӮ¬10,000,000 Г— 83.18777/100 = вӮ¬8,318,777.
Semi-annual: вӮ¬10,000,000 Г— 105.91556/100 = вӮ¬10,591,556.
Therefore, the weights are 43.991% for the zero-coupon bond and 56.009%
for the semi-annual bond. As a result, the weighted-average modified duration is
(4.81928 Г— 0.43991) + (7.71210 Г— 0.56009) = 6.43953.
2. Calculate the weighted-average convexity for the portfolio.
Solution:

Using the weights calculated previously,
Weighted-average convexity = (27.87052 Г— 0.43991) + (72.54897 Г— 0.56009)
= 52.89463.
3. Calculate the estimated percentage price change of the portfolio given a 100
bp increase in yield-to-maturity on each of the bonds.
Solution:

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
Portfolio Duration and Convexity
%вҲҶPVFull вүҲ (вҖ“6.43953 Г— 0.0100) + [ВҪ Г— 52.89463 Г— (0.0100)2] = вҖ“6.1751%.
4. Based on rising inflation and tightening monetary policy, the investor expects interest rates to rise. Given that view, which bond should the investor
consider replacing the 10-year bond with?
A. A 20-year bond
B. A 15-year floating-rate bond
C. A 10-year bond with a lower coupon
Solution:
B is correct. With interest rates expected to rise, the investor should choose
a bond with lower interest rate risk. Both the 20-year bond and the 10-year
bond with a lower coupon should have higher durations than the current
10-year bond, all else equal, and would be expected to experience a larger
percentage price decrease if interest rates increase. Floating-rate bonds,
however, have low interest rate risk because coupon payments adjust to
changing interest rates.

311

312

Learning Module 12

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
Yield-Based Bond Convexity and Portfolio Properties

PRACTICE PROBLEMS
1. A 5.5% semiannual-pay fixed-coupon bond is issued at par on 1 May 2025 and
matures on 1 May 2029. For a 5 bps increase and decrease in yield-to-maturity,
PV+ and PVвҖ“ are 98.245077 and 101.792534, respectively. The approximate convexity is closest to:
A. 3.548.
B. 15.045.
C. 101.793.
2. A bond pays a semiannual fixed coupon of 4.75%. It trades at par on its coupon
date of 16 December 2025 and matures on 16 December 2033. The bondвҖҷs annualized convexity statistic is closest to:
A. 51.670.
B. 53.231.
C. 206.681.
3. For changes in yield-to-maturity, the convexity adjustment is most needed to
account for the:
A. first-order effect on bond prices.
B. bond price risk due to small changes in yield-to-maturity.
C. non-linear relationship of bond prices and yield to maturity.

The following information relates to questions
4-9
A bond portfolio consists of the following three option-free, fixed-rate bonds:
Bond

Market Value (ВЈ)

Annual Modified Duration

Annual Convexity

X

5,000,000

3.6239

16.2513

Y

5,000,000

9.0036

91.0278

Z

10,000,000

12.7512

179.8591

4. If the yield-to-maturity of Bond X increases by 50 bps, the expected percentage
price change of Bond X is closest to:
A. вҖ“1.792%.
B. вҖ“1.812%.
C. вҖ“1.832%.
5. Given a 75 bps change in the yields-to-maturity for Bonds Y and Z, the convexity
adjustment for Bond Z would be greater than the convexity adjustment of Bond

Practice Problems

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.

Y:
A. if the YTM change is positive.
B. if the YTM change is negative.
C. regardless of the direction of the change in YTM.
6. For a 100 bps increase in yield-to-maturity and using money duration and money
convexity, the estimated change in Bond YвҖҷs full price is closest to:
A. вҖ“GBP472,937.
B. вҖ“GBP450,180.
C. вҖ“GBP427,423.
7. For a 100 bps increase in yield-to-maturity and using the weighted average duration and convexity, the expected percentage price change for the bond portfolio is
closest to:
A. вҖ“7.981%.
B. вҖ“8.949%.
C. вҖ“9.533%.
8. The bond portfolioвҖҷs benchmark is a fixed-income index with a duration of 9.5325
and convexity of 103.0677. Based on the weighted-average portfolio duration and
convexity, the portfolio should outperform its benchmark in which of the following scenarios?
A. Only when interest rates are rising
B. Only when interest rates are falling
C. Both when interest rates are rising and falling
9. The method of using weighted-average portfolio duration and convexity measures to assess price risk of a bond portfolio is best characterized as:
A. being theoretically correct.
B. being commonly used by portfolio managers.
C. accommodating non-parallel shifts in the yield curve.

313

314

Learning Module 12

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
Yield-Based Bond Convexity and Portfolio Properties

SOLUTIONS
1. B is correct.
101.792534 + 98.245077 вҲ’ вҖӢ(2 Г— 100)вҖӢ
вҖӢ 0.0005 вҖӢ вҖӢГ— 100

	вҖӢApproxCon = __________________________
вҖӢвҖҜвҖҜвҖҜ
вҖҜвҖҜ
вҖӢ = 15.044498.вҖӢ
(
)2
2. A is correct.

Eight-Year, 4.70% Semiannual Bond
Fixed Coupon (%)

4.70

Price (per 100 Par Value)

100

Periods p.a.

2

Yield-to-Maturity (%)

4.70
Col. 6 = Col. 2 Г—
Col. 5

Col. 7 = Col. 2 Г— (Col. 2 + 1)
Г— Col. 5 Г— (1 + YTM/2)вҖ“2

Weight

Time to Receipt Г—
Weight

Convexity of Cash Flows

2.296043

0.02296

0.02296

0.04384

2.35

2.243325

0.02243

0.04487

0.12849

2.35

2.191817

0.02192

0.06575

0.25108

4.0

2.35

2.141492

0.02141

0.08566

0.40886

5

5.0

2.35

2.092323

0.02092

0.10462

0.59920

6

6.0

2.35

2.044282

0.02044

0.12266

0.81962

7

7.0

2.35

1.997344

0.01997

0.13981

1.06774

8

8.0

2.35

1.951484

0.01951

0.15612

1.34129

9

9.0

2.35

1.906677

0.01907

0.17160

1.63811

10

10.0

2.35

1.862899

0.01863

0.18629

1.95617

11

11.0

2.35

1.820126

0.01820

0.20021

2.29351

12

12.0

2.35

1.778336

0.01778

0.21340

2.64827

13

13.0

2.35

1.737504

0.01738

0.22588

3.01871

14

14.0

2.35

1.697610

0.01698

0.23767

3.40315

15

15.0

2.35

1.658632

0.01659

0.24879

3.80002

16

16.0

102.35

70.580104

0.70580

11.29282

183.26330

100.0000

1.00000

13.51910

206.68136

Col. 1

Col. 2

Col. 3

Col. 4

Col. 5

Period

Time to
Receipt

Cash Flow

Present Value

1

1.0

2.35

2

2.0

3

3.0

4

Annualized Convexity

51.67034

3. C is correct. The convexity adjustment is a complementary risk measure to
duration. It accounts for the second-order (non-linear) effect of yield changes on
price. It is most useful for large yield changes, because duration provides a good
approximation for small yield changes.
4. A is correct. The expected price change is calculated as follows:
%О”PVFull вүҲ (вҖ“3.6239 Г— 0.005) + [ВҪ Г— 16.2513 Г— (0.005)2]

Solutions

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.

= вҖ“1.79164% вүҲ вҖ“1.792%.
5. C is correct. Since the convexity adjustment uses the square of the change
in yield, it is always positive regardless of the direction of the change in
yield-to-maturity. As a result, the convexity adjustment for Bond Z will always
be greater than the convexity adjustment for Bond Y, given the same change in
yields-to-maturity.
6. C is correct.
MoneyDur вүҲ 9.0036 Г— 5,000,000 = 45,018,000
MoneyCon вүҲ 91.0278 Г— 5,000,000 = 455,139,000
О”PVFull вүҲ вҖ“(45,018,000 Г— 0.01) + [ВҪ Г— 455,139,000 Г— (0.01)2] = вҖ“GBP427,423.
7. B is correct. The portfolio weights for Bonds X, Y, and Z are 0.25, 0.25, and 0.50,
respectively. The weighted average duration and convexity measures are calculated as follows:
Weighted-average duration = (0.25 Г— 3.6239) + (0.25 Г— 9.0036) + (0.50 Г— 12.7512)
= 9.5325.
Weighted-average convexity = (0.25 Г— 16.2513) + (0.25 Г— 91.0278) + (0.50 Г—
179.8591)
= 116.7493.
%О”PVFull вүҲ (вҖ“9.5325 Г— 0.01) + [ВҪ Г— 116.7493 Г— (0.01)2] = вҖ“8.9487% вүҲ вҖ“8.949%.
8. C is correct. The portfolio has a weighted-average duration of 9.5325, which is
identical to the benchmarkвҖҷs duration. However, the portfolio has higher convexity (116.7493) compared to the benchmark (103.0677). All else equal, the portfolio
should outperform the lower-duration benchmark portfolio in both rising and
falling interest rate environments.
9. B is correct. The weighted-average portfolio duration and convexity method
is easy to calculate and apply in practice and is commonly used by portfolio
managers to assess bond portfolio price risk. It does, however, implicitly assume
parallel shifts in the yield curve. Using the weighted average of time to receipt of
the aggregate cash flows is the theoretically correct method to calculate portfolio
duration and convexity, but it is difficult to use in practice.

315

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.

LEARNING MODULE

13

Curve-Based and Empirical
Fixed-Income Risk Measures
LEARNING OUTCOMES
Mastery

The candidate should be able to:
explain why effective duration and effective convexity are the most
appropriate measures of interest rate risk for bonds with embedded
options
calculate the percentage price change of a bond for a specified
change in benchmark yield, given the bondвҖҷs effective duration and
convexity
define key rate duration and describe its use to measure price
sensitivity of fixed-income instruments to benchmark yield curve
changes
describe the difference between empirical duration and analytical
duration

INTRODUCTION
Having covered yield-based duration and convexity measures, we now introduce
curve-based measures of a bondвҖҷs price sensitivity to changes in a benchmark yield
curve and when cash flows are uncertain. We show how the change in a bondвҖҷs full
price is estimated by combining curve-based duration and convexity sensitivity measures, discuss uses of these approximate measures by issuers and investors, and explain
their benefits and limitations. We also introduce key rate duration as a measure of
interest rate risk across the term structure. Finally, we show that benchmark yield
changes and credit spreads for issuers of lower credit quality are negatively correlated,
especially during periods of market distress, establishing the benefit of an empirical
versus analytical approach.
LEARNING MODULE OVERVIEW
в– 

Yield duration and convexity estimates of interest rate risk are
useful only for small changes in yields. Effective duration and
effective convexity are valid for both small and large changes in yields.

1

318

Learning Module 13

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
Curve-Based and Empirical Fixed-Income Risk Measures

в– 

Effective duration and effective convexity are useful for gauging the
interest rate risk of bonds whose future cash flows are uncertain.

в– 

Effective duration and effective convexity can be used to estimate the
percentage change in a bondвҖҷs full price for a given shift in the benchmark yield curve.

в– 

A key rate (or partial) duration is a measure of a bondвҖҷs sensitivity to a
change in the benchmark yield at a specific maturity. Key rate duration data, along with forecasted shifts in the benchmark curve, allow a
portfolio to be rebalanced to improve its return.

в– 

The sum of weighted key rate durations of the bonds in a portfolio are
equal to the effective duration of the entire portfolio.

в– 

Analytical duration and convexity are estimated duration and convexity statistics using mathematical formulas. Empirical duration and
convexity are estimated using historical data that incorporate various
factors affecting bond prices.

в– 

When deciding whether to use an empirical or analytical measure,
the correlation between benchmark yields and credit spreads must be
considered.

LEARNING MODULE SELF-ASSESSMENT
These initial questions are intended to help you gauge your current level
of understanding of the learning module.
1. For which of the following-fixed income instruments would an investor most
likely use yield duration and convexity to measure interest rate risk rather
than effective duration and effective convexity?
A. 30-year fixed-rate bond
B. Callable bond
C. Mortgage-backed security
Solution:
A is correct. The callable bond and mortgage-backed security have embedded options, which yield duration and convexity cannot account for. The
30-year fixed-rate bond does not, so either method could be applied.
2. Calculate the effective duration of a bond given the following:
в– 

PV0 = 102.208.

в– 

Price with the benchmark yield curve shifted up 25 bps: PV+ =
100.004.

в– 

Price with the benchmark yield curve shifted down by 25 bps: PVвҖ“ =
103.891.

Solution:
вҖӢ(P вҖӢVвҖӢ вҖӢ)вҖӢвҲ’ вҖӢ(P вҖӢVвҖӢ вҖӢ)вҖӢ

________________
вҲ’
+
	вҖӢEffDur = 2вҖӢ
вҖҜвҖҜ
вҖҜвҖҜ
вҖӢ
Г— вҖӢ(О”Curve)вҖӢГ— вҖӢ(P вҖӢV0вҖӢ вҖӢ)вҖӢ
вҖӢ(103.891)вҖӢвҲ’ вҖӢ(100.004)вҖӢ

вҖҜвҖҜ
вҖҜвҖҜ
вҖӢ
	вҖӢEffDur = 2__________________
вҖӢ
Г— вҖӢ(0.0025)вҖӢГ— вҖӢ(102.208)вҖӢ
EffDur = 7.606

Introduction

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.

3. Calculate the effective convexity of a bond given the following:
в– 

PV0 = 102.208.

в– 

Price with the benchmark yield curve shifted up 25 bps: PV+ =
100.004.

в– 

Price with the benchmark yield curve shifted down by 25 bps: PVвҖ“ =
103.891.

Solution:
вҖӢ[вҖӢ(P вҖӢVвҖӢвҲ’вҖӢ)вҖӢ+ вҖӢ(P вҖӢVвҖӢ+вҖӢ)вҖӢ]вҖӢвҲ’ вҖӢ[2 Г— вҖӢ(P вҖӢVвҖӢ0вҖӢ)вҖӢ]вҖӢ
вҖҜвҖҜвҖҜ
вҖҜвҖҜ
вҖӢ
	вҖӢEffCon = ______________________
вҖӢ
вҖӢ(О”Curve)вҖӢ2вҖӢГ— вҖӢ(P вҖӢV0вҖӢ вҖӢ)вҖӢ
вҖӢ[вҖӢ(103.891)вҖӢ+ вҖӢ(100.004)вҖӢ]вҖӢвҲ’ вҖӢ[2 Г— вҖӢ(102.208)вҖӢ]вҖӢ
вҖӢ 0.0025 вҖӢ вҖӢГ— вҖӢ 102.208 вҖӢ

вҖҜвҖҜвҖҜ
вҖҜвҖҜвҖҜ
вҖӢ
	вҖӢEffCon = _____________________________
вҖӢ
(
)2 (
)
EffCon = вҲ’815.592

4. If the benchmark yield curve shifted by 50 bps, what would be the percentage change in the full price of a bond if its effective duration is 6.094 and its
effective convexity is вҖ“230.097?
Solution:

вҖӢ21 вҖӢГ— EffCon Г— вҖӢ(О”Curve)вҖӢ2вҖӢ]вҖӢ
	вҖӢ%О”P вҖӢVвҖӢFullвҖӢ вүҲ вҖӢ(вҲ’ EffDur Г— О”Curve)вҖӢ+ вҖӢ[_
	вҖӢ%О”P вҖӢVвҖӢFullвҖӢ вүҲ (вҖӢ вҲ’ 6.094 Г— 0.005)вҖӢ+ вҖӢ[_
вҖӢ12 вҖӢГ— вҲ’ 230.097 Г— вҖӢ(0.005)вҖӢ2вҖӢ]вҖӢ
%О”PVFull вүҲ 3.33%
5. The table below contains forecasts of expected changes in the benchmark
yield curve by tenor.
вҖӢ

Maturity

1 year

5 years

10 years

20 years

30 years

Curve shift at
maturity

+100 bps

+150 bps

+200 bps

+250 bps

+300 bps

вҖӢ

Your portfolio contains equally sized positions in Bond A and Bond B,
which have the following key rate durations.
вҖӢ

Tenor

Key Rate Duration

Bond A

5 years

1.706

Bond B

10 years

3.195

вҖӢ

Given the information and expected changes in yields, identify the bond
that could be sold to improve returns.
Solution:

Bond B, because its expected price decline from the expected change in
benchmark yields is more than twice that of Bond A.
For Bond A, вҲҶPV/PV = вҖ“1.706 Г— 0.015 = вҖ“2.56%.
For Bond B, вҲҶPV/PV = вҖ“3.195 Г— 0.020 = вҖ“6.39%.

319

320

Learning Module 13

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
Curve-Based and Empirical Fixed-Income Risk Measures

6. Explain why yield duration and convexity are less useful for bonds with contingency features, such as callable bonds.
Solution:

Yield duration and convexity assume cash flows are received on scheduled
dates. Cash flows from bonds with contingency features may not be received
on scheduled datesвҖ”if, for example, a callable bond is called by the issuer
following a decrease in interest rates. Therefore, yield duration and convexity would not correctly measure the price sensitivity to interest rates.
7. When comparing analytical duration versus empirical duration, which of
the following statements is correct?
A. Analytical duration and convexity are estimated duration and convexity statistics using mathematical formulas.
B. Empirical duration and convexity are estimated using historical data in
non-statistical models that incorporate various factors affecting bond
prices.
C. Both A and B
Solution:
A is correct. Analytical duration and convexity are estimated duration and
convexity statistics using mathematical formulas.
B is incorrect because statistical models are primarily used to determine
empirical duration and convexity.
C is incorrect because B is incorrect.
8. True or false: Analytical duration is superior to empirical duration for bonds
with credit risk.
Solution:

False. If government bond yields are driven lower in a market stress scenario, the вҖңflight to safetyвҖқ will also cause credit spreads to widen because of
an increase in expected default risk. Since credit spreads and benchmark
yields are negatively correlated under this scenario, wider credit spreads will
partially or fully offset the decline in government benchmark yields, resulting in lower empirical duration estimates than analytical duration estimates.
Therefore, empirical duration estimates are a more accurate method of
forecasting bond price changes for bonds with credit risk.

2

CURVE-BASED INTEREST RATE RISK MEASURES
explain why effective duration and effective convexity are the most
appropriate measures of interest rate risk for bonds with embedded
options
Yield duration and convexity assume a bondвҖҷs cash flows are certain. However, if a
bond has contingency features, such as embedded options, as with a callable (or puttable) bond, then future cash flows are uncertain since option exercise depends on
the level of market interest rates relative to coupon interest being paid (or received).

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
Curve-Based Interest Rate Risk Measures

For example, the duration of a callable bond does not reflect the sensitivity of the
bond price to a change in the yield-to-worst, since this represents only one of several
possible outcomes based on future interest rates.
Consequently, bonds with embedded options do not have well-defined
yields-to-maturity, so Macaulay and modified durations are not appropriate interest
rate risk measures for such bonds. Rather, the appropriate measure of interest rate
risk is the sensitivity of the bondвҖҷs price to a change in a benchmark yield curveвҖ”for
example, the government par curveвҖ”known as effective duration, a curve duration
rather than a yield duration statistic.
Exhibit 1 shows the impact of an instantaneous change in the benchmark yield
curve (О”Curve) on the price of a callable bond compared with that on a comparable
non-callable bond. The two bonds have the same features (i.e., coupon rate, payment
frequency, time-to-maturity, and credit risk). Note that the horizontal axis is a benchmark yieldвҖ”a point on the par curve for government bonds.

Exhibit 1: Interest Rate Risk Characteristics of a Callable Bond
Price
Value of the embedded call option

PV_
PV0

Non-callable bond

PV+
Callable bond
вҲҶCurve

вҲҶCurve

Benchmark yield

The price of the non-callable bond is always greater than that of the comparable callable bond. The difference is the value of the embedded call option, which is held by
the bond issuer (not the investor). When interest rates are high relative to the coupon
rate, the value of the call option is low. When rates are low, the value of the call option
is high since the issuer is more likely to exercise the option to refinance the debt at
the lower prevailing rates. The investor bears the вҖңcall riskвҖқ since if the bond is called,
the investor must reinvest the proceeds at a lower interest rate.
Exhibit 1 shows that, given parallel shifts in the benchmark yield curve, when
benchmark yields are high (О”Curve is positive), the effective durations of the callable
and non-callable bonds are very similar. But when interest rates are low (О”Curve is
negative), the effective duration of the callable bond is lower than that of the otherwise
comparable non-callable bond, since the callable bond price does not increase as much
when benchmark yields fall; the presence of the call option limits price appreciation.
Thus, an embedded call option reduces the effective duration of the bond, especially
when interest rates are falling and the bond is more likely to be called. The lower
effective duration can be interpreted as a shorter expected lifeвҖ”a reduced weighted
average of time to receipt of cash flow.
Analogous to effective duration, the second-order effect of a parallel shift in the
benchmark yield curve is measured by effective convexity, a curve convexity statistic.
In Exhibit 1, as the benchmark yield declines, the slope of the line tangent to the curve

321

322

Learning Module 13

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
Curve-Based and Empirical Fixed-Income Risk Measures

for the non-callable bond steepens, indicating positive convexity. But the slope of the
line tangent to the callable bond flattens as the benchmark yield declines and reaches
an inflection point, after which the effective convexity becomes negative.
When the benchmark yield is high and the value of the embedded call option is low,
the callable and the non-callable bonds experience very similar effects from interest
rate changes and both have positive convexity. But as the benchmark yield declines, the
curves diverge, and at some point, the callable bond moves into the range of negative
convexity, since the embedded call option has more value to the issuer and is more
likely to be exercised. This situation further limits the potential price appreciation of
the bond arising from lower benchmark yields.
Exhibit 2 shows characteristics of a bond with an embedded put option.

Exhibit 2: Interest Rate Risk Characteristics of a Putable Bond
Price
Putable bond
Value of the embedded put option

PVвҖ“
PV0
PV+

Non-putable bond
вҲҶCurve

вҲҶCurve

Benchmark yield

A putable bond allows the investor to sell the bond back to the issuer before maturity,
usually at par value, protecting the investor from higher benchmark yields that would
otherwise drive the bondвҖҷs price below par. So, the price of a putable bond is always
higher than that of an otherwise comparable non-putable bond, the price difference
being the value of the embedded put option.
An embedded put option reduces the effective duration of the bond, especially
when rates are rising. Given a parallel shift in the benchmark yield curve, if interest
rates are low compared to the coupon rate, the value of the put option is low and
the impact of a change in the benchmark yield on the bondвҖҷs price is very similar to
that for a non-putable bond. But when benchmark interest rates rise, the put option
becomes more valuable to the investor, since the ability to sell the bond back to the
issuer at par limits the price depreciation as rates rise. Importantly, putable bonds
always have positive effective convexity.
Effective duration and effective convexity are also relevant for mortgage-backed
securities (MBSs), which arise from a residential (or commercial) loan portfolio
securitization and are covered in later lessons. MBS cash flows are contingent on
homeownersвҖҷ ability to refinance or pay off an existing mortgage with the proceeds
from a new mortgage. Refinancing is a common feature of mortgages in the United
States and some other jurisdictions that borrowers tend to exercise if interest rates fall.
Calculating effective duration (EffDur) is very similar to calculating approximate
modified duration, as shown in Equation 1.
(P вҖӢVвҖӢ вҖӢ) вҲ’ (P вҖӢVвҖӢ вҖӢ)

вҲ’
+
	вҖӢEffDur = 2________________
вҖӢвҖҜвҖҜ
вҖҜвҖҜ
Г— (О”Curve ) Г— (P вҖӢVвҖӢ вҖӢ) вҖӢ	
0

(1)

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
Curve-Based Interest Rate Risk Measures

The formula for calculating effective convexity (EffCon) is also very similar to the
formula for approximate convexity, as shown in Equation 2.
[(P вҖӢVвҲ’вҖӢ вҖӢ) + (P вҖӢV+вҖӢ вҖӢ) ] вҲ’ [2 Г— (P вҖӢV0вҖӢ вҖӢ) ]

вҖҜвҖҜвҖҜ
вҖҜвҖҜ
вҖӢ	
	вҖӢEffCon = ______________________
вҖӢ
2
вҖӢ(О”Curve)вҖӢ вҖӢГ— (P вҖӢV0вҖӢ вҖӢ)

(2)

The differences are that О”Curve is in the denominatorвҖ”since effective duration is a
curve duration statistic, it measures interest rate risk in terms of a parallel shift in the
benchmark yield curveвҖ”and that PVвҖ“ and PV+ are calculated using option pricing
models. These models are covered in more detail in later modules but include such
inputs as (1) the length of the call protection period, (2) the schedule of call prices
and call dates, (3) an assumption about credit spreads over benchmark yields (which
also includes any liquidity spread), (4) an assumption about future interest rate volatility, and (5) the level of market interest rates (e.g., the government par curve). The
analyst holds the first four inputs constant and then raises and lowers the fifth input
(i.e., parallel shifts) to derive PV+ and PVвҖ“, respectively.
Although effective duration and effective convexity are the appropriate interest
rate risk measure for bonds with embedded options, they may also be useful with
option-free bonds to supplement yield duration. Importantly, small differences may
arise between a bondвҖҷs effective duration and its modified duration because when the
government par curve is shifted in the model, the government spot (i.e., zero) curve is
also shifted, but not in the same parallel manner. Thus, the change in the bond price
is not the same as it would be if its yield-to-maturity changed by the same amount
as the change in the par curve.
In general, modified duration and effective duration on an option-free bond are
not identical. However, the difference narrows when the yield curve is flatter, the
time-to-maturity is shorter, and the bond is priced closer to par value; the difference
disappears only in the rare circumstance of a flat yield curve.
For example, consider BRWAвҖҷs five-year, 3.2% (semiannual) coupon bond priced
at par for settlement on 15 October 2025 and maturity on 15 October 2030. Using
PV0 = 100.00 and вҲҶYield = 0.0005, in an earlier lesson, we found
PV+ = 99.771 and PVвҖ“ = 100.230,

resulting in yield duration and convexity statistics as follows:
ApproxModDur = 4.587 and ApproxCon = 24.239.
Instead of a change in the bondвҖҷs yield-to-maturity, assume there is an upward and
downward shift of the benchmark government par curve (вҲҶCurve) by 5 bps, which
causes spot rates to move in a slightly non-parallel manner. Using PV0 = 100.00 and
вҲҶCurve = 0.0005 and assuming the following new prices,
PV+ = 99.760 and PVвҖ“ = 100.241,
then using Equation 1, effective duration is 4.816:
вҖӢ(P вҖӢVвҖӢ вҖӢ)вҖӢвҲ’ вҖӢ(P вҖӢVвҖӢ вҖӢ)вҖӢ

________________
вҲ’
+
	вҖӢEffDur = 2вҖӢ
вҖҜвҖҜ
вҖҜвҖҜ
вҖӢ
Г— вҖӢ(О”Curve)вҖӢГ— вҖӢ(P вҖӢV0вҖӢ вҖӢ)вҖӢ
(вҖӢ 100.241)вҖӢвҲ’ (вҖӢ 99.760)вҖӢ

	вҖӢEffDur = _______________
вҖӢвҖҜвҖҜвҖӢ
2 Г— вҖӢ(0.0005)вҖӢГ— вҖӢ(100)вҖӢ
EffDur = 4.816

Using the same inputs in Equation 2, effective convexity is 40.000:
вҖӢ[вҖӢ(P вҖӢVвҖӢвҲ’вҖӢ)вҖӢ+ вҖӢ(P вҖӢVвҖӢ+вҖӢ)вҖӢ]вҖӢвҲ’ вҖӢ[2 Г— вҖӢ(P вҖӢVвҖӢ0вҖӢ)вҖӢ]вҖӢ
вҖҜвҖҜвҖҜ
вҖҜвҖҜ
вҖӢ
	вҖӢEffCon = ______________________
вҖӢ
вҖӢ(О”Curve)вҖӢ2вҖӢГ— вҖӢ(P вҖӢV0вҖӢ вҖӢ)вҖӢ
вҖӢ[вҖӢ(100.241)вҖӢ+ вҖӢ(99.760)вҖӢ]вҖӢвҲ’ вҖӢ[2 Г— вҖӢ(100)вҖӢ]вҖӢ
вҖӢ 0.0005 вҖӢ вҖӢГ— вҖӢ 100 вҖӢ

вҖҜвҖҜвҖҜ
вҖҜвҖҜ
вҖӢ
	вҖӢEffCon = __________________________
вҖӢ
)
(
)2 (

323

324

Learning Module 13

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
Curve-Based and Empirical Fixed-Income Risk Measures

EffCon = 40.000
EXAMPLE 1

Effective Duration and Convexity
The portfolio manager asks you, the analyst on a fixed-income team, to determine
the interest rate sensitivity of a callable bond she is considering. The portfolio
manager is seeking to invest in a bond with a duration between 7.0 and 8.0 and
positive convexity.
Suppose the full price of the callable bond is 101.060 per 100 of par value.
When the government par curve is raised and lowered by 25 bps, the new full
prices for this callable bond from your option valuation model are 99.050 and
102.891, respectively. Therefore,
в– 
в– 
в– 
в– 

PV0 = 101.060,
PV+ = 99.050,

PVвҖ“ = 102.891, and
О”Curve = 0.0025.

You determine effective duration and effective convexity for this callable
bond as follows:
вҖӢ(P вҖӢVвҖӢ вҖӢ)вҖӢвҲ’ вҖӢ(P вҖӢVвҖӢ вҖӢ)вҖӢ

________________
вҲ’
+
	вҖӢEffDur = 2вҖӢ
вҖҜвҖҜ
вҖҜвҖҜ
.вҖӢвҖӢ
Г— вҖӢ(О”Curve)вҖӢГ— вҖӢ(P вҖӢV0вҖӢ вҖӢ)вҖӢ
(вҖӢ 102.891)вҖӢвҲ’ (вҖӢ 99.050)вҖӢ

вҖҜвҖҜ
вҖҜвҖҜ
вҖӢ.вҖӢ
	вҖӢEffDur = 2___________________
вҖӢ
Г— вҖӢ(0.00025)вҖӢГ— вҖӢ(101.060)вҖӢ
EffDur = 7.601.
вҖӢ[(вҖӢ P вҖӢVвҖӢвҲ’)вҖӢ вҖӢ+ вҖӢ(P вҖӢVвҖӢ+вҖӢ)вҖӢвҲ’ 2 Г— вҖӢ(P вҖӢVвҖӢ0вҖӢ)вҖӢ]вҖӢ
вҖҜвҖҜвҖҜ
вҖҜвҖҜвҖӢ.вҖӢ
	вҖӢEffCon = _____________________
вҖӢ (
вҖӢ О”Curve)вҖӢ2вҖӢГ— вҖӢ(P вҖӢV0вҖӢ вҖӢ)вҖӢ
вҖӢ[вҖӢ(102.891)вҖӢ+ вҖӢ(99.050)вҖӢ]вҖӢвҲ’ вҖӢ[2 Г— вҖӢ(101.060)вҖӢ]вҖӢ
вҖӢ 0.00025 вҖӢ вҖӢГ— вҖӢ 101.060 вҖӢ

вҖҜвҖҜвҖҜ
вҖҜвҖҜвҖҜ
вҖӢ.вҖӢ
	вҖӢEffCon = _____________________________
вҖӢ
(
)2 (
)
EffCon = вҲ’283.
You recommend that the portfolio manager not buy this callable bond. While
its effective duration meets her criteria, the bond has negative effective convexity.

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
Curve-Based Interest Rate Risk Measures

QUESTION SET
1. Match each scenario to the interest rate risk measures below.
вҖӢ

Scenario

Interest rate risk measure

A. BondвҖҷs percentage price change given
a change in its yield-to-maturity

Money duration

B. Linear approximation of the bondвҖҷs
price change in currency, given a 1%
change in yield

Modified duration

C. Callable bond

Effective duration
вҖӢ

Solution:
The match for A is modified duration. Modified duration is used to estimate
the percentage price change given a change in yield-to-maturity.
The match for B is money duration. Money duration expresses modified
duration in currency units, which can be used to estimate the currency unit
change in the position of a bond.
The match for C is effective duration. Callable bonds have uncertain future
cash flows with respect to future interest rates. Therefore, a curve duration
statistic, such as effective duration, would be best to measure interest rate
risk.
Questions 2вҖ“5 relate to the following information:
As a member of a fixed-income team, you are asked to examine pricing data
for a Viviyu Inc. callable bond. The current full price, the price assuming the
benchmark yield curve shifts up 25 bps, and the price assuming the benchmark
yield curve shifts down by 25 bps, are as follows:
в– 
в– 
в– 

PV0 = 102.208,

PV+ = 100.004, and
PVвҖ“ = 103.891.

2. Calculate the effective duration of the Viviyu Inc. callable bond.
Solution:

(вҖӢ P вҖӢVвҖӢ )вҖӢ вҖӢвҲ’ вҖӢ(P вҖӢVвҖӢ вҖӢ)вҖӢ

________________
вҲ’
+
	вҖӢEffDur = 2вҖӢ
вҖҜвҖҜ
вҖҜвҖҜ
вҖӢ.вҖӢ
Г— вҖӢ(О”Curve)вҖӢГ— (вҖӢ P вҖӢV0вҖӢ вҖӢ)вҖӢ
вҖӢ(103.891)вҖӢвҲ’ вҖӢ(100.004)вҖӢ

вҖҜвҖҜ
вҖҜвҖҜ
вҖӢ.вҖӢ
	вҖӢEffDur = 2___________________
вҖӢ
Г— вҖӢ(0.00025)вҖӢГ— вҖӢ(102.208)вҖӢ
EffDur = 76.061.
3. In an audit of the data, it was determined that PV+ was incorrect and that
the correct value of PV+ is 100.50426. All other data values were correct.

325

326

Learning Module 13

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
Curve-Based and Empirical Fixed-Income Risk Measures

Explain whether the updated data would increase or decrease the value of
effective duration.
Solution:

There is no need to recalculate the effective duration. Since the updated
PV+ value is larger than the prior one, with all else constant, the numerator
would be lower; thus, effective duration would decrease.
4. Calculate the effective convexity of the Viviyu Inc. callable bond using the
following:
в– 
в– 
в– 
в– 

PV0 = 102.208,
PV+ = 98.504,

PVвҖ“ = 103.891, and
О”Curve = 0.0025.

Solution:
вҖӢ[(вҖӢ P вҖӢVвҖӢвҲ’)вҖӢ вҖӢ+ вҖӢ(P вҖӢVвҖӢ+вҖӢ)вҖӢ]вҖӢвҲ’ вҖӢ[2 Г— вҖӢ(P вҖӢVвҖӢ0вҖӢ)вҖӢ]вҖӢ
вҖҜвҖҜвҖҜ
вҖҜвҖҜвҖӢ.вҖӢ
	вҖӢEffCon = ______________________
вҖӢ
вҖӢ(О”Curve)вҖӢ2вҖӢГ— вҖӢ(P вҖӢV0вҖӢ вҖӢ)вҖӢ

[вҖӢ (вҖӢ 103.891)вҖӢ+ (вҖӢ 98.504)]вҖӢ вҖӢвҲ’ [вҖӢ 2 Г— (вҖӢ 102.208)]вҖӢ вҖӢ
вҖӢ 0.00025 вҖӢ вҖӢГ— вҖӢ 102.208 вҖӢ

вҖҜвҖҜвҖҜ
вҖҜвҖҜвҖҜ
вҖӢ.вҖӢ
	вҖӢEffCon = _____________________________
вҖӢ
(
)2 (
)
EffCon = вҲ’3,164.
5. In Question 4, the effective convexity was negative, not positive as it was for
the effective duration. Explain what negative effective convexity implies.
Solution:

Negative effective convexity implies that the bond price will decline by a
greater amount with an upward shift in benchmark yield than it will increase with a decline in the benchmark yield.

3

BOND RISK AND RETURN USING CURVE-BASED
DURATION AND CONVEXITY
calculate the percentage price change of a bond for a specified
change in benchmark yield, given the bondвҖҷs effective duration and
convexity
As we have seen, effective duration and effective convexity are curve-based metrics
that are useful for gauging the interest rate risk of complex instrumentsвҖ”such as those
with embedded contingency provisionsвҖ”whose future cash flows are uncertain. These
metrics are typically determined from bond prices derived using an option valuation
model, given specific (parallel) changes in the underlying benchmark government
yield curve.
Just as with yield-based interest rate risk measures, effective duration and effective
convexity can be used to estimate the percentage change in a bondвҖҷs full price for a
given shift in the benchmark yield curve (вҲҶCurve), as shown in Equation 3.

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
Bond Risk and Return Using Curve-Based Duration and Convexity

	вҖӢ%О”P вҖӢVвҖӢFullвҖӢ вүҲ (вҲ’ EffDur Г— О”Curve ) + вҖӢ[_
вҖӢ21 вҖӢГ— EffCon Г— вҖӢ(О”Curve)вҖӢ2вҖӢ]вҖӢ.вҖӢ	

(3)

LetвҖҷs return to BRWAвҖҷs five-year, 3.2% (semiannual) coupon bond priced at par for
settlement on 15 October 2025 and maturity on 15 October 2030. Using Equation 3
and previously derived effective duration and effective convexity,
EffDur = 4.816 and EffCon = 26.723,
the percentage changes in the bondвҖҷs full price for Вұ100 bp shifts in the benchmark
government par curve are estimated as follows:
%вҲҶPVFull вүҲ (вҖ“4.816 Г— 0.01) + [ВҪ Г— 26.723 Г— (0.01)2] = вҖ“4.68%.

%вҲҶPVFull вүҲ (вҖ“4.816 Г— вҖ“0.01) + [ВҪ Г— 26.723 Г— (вҖ“0.01)2] = 4.95%.
These bond price changes compare with the previously derived estimates of вҖ“4.47%
and 4.71% for this BRWA bond when using ApproxModDur alone and ApproxModDur
and ApproxCon, respectively, with yield-to-maturity changes of Вұ100 bps.
As noted earlier, the differences in results using the curve-based measures versus
the yield-based interest rate risk measures are due to slightly different bond prices
(PV+ and PVвҖ“) and, therefore, EffDur and EffCon metrics (versus ApproxModDur
and ApproxCon metrics) since a parallel shift in the government par curve produces
a non-parallel shift in spot (zero) rates and one-year forward rates.
Curve-based interest rate risk measures are important for both issuers and investors. For example, as noted previously, for a callable bond, when the benchmark
curve shifts downward and interest rates are low relative to the bondвҖҷs coupon rate,
effective duration declines and effective convexity may even turn from positive to
negative. From an investorвҖҷs perspective, these results severely limit the bondвҖҷs price
appreciation in a declining interest rate environment. From the issuerвҖҷs perspective,
the bonds can be bought back at the call price and refinanced at lower market rates.
As for a putable bond, when the benchmark curve shifts upward and interest
rates are high relative to the bondвҖҷs coupon rate, both effective duration and effective
convexity decline (but effective convexity always remains positive), which, from an
investorвҖҷs perspective, limits the bondвҖҷs price depreciation in a rising interest rate
environment. This is because the investor can sell the bonds back to issuer at the put
price (typically par), rather than at a discounted price, and reinvest the proceeds at
the higher prevailing market rates.
A practical consideration in using effective duration and effective convexity is setting the change in the benchmark yield curve. With approximate modified duration,
accuracy is improved by choosing a smaller yield-to-maturity change. The pricing
models used for more complex securities, such as callable bonds issued by corporations and asset-backed securities (ABSs), include assumptions about the behavior of
corporate issuers or the borrowers whose loans make up the underlying ABS assets
under different interest rate scenarios. For example, a corporate issuerвҖҷs decision
to call a bond and refinance depends in part on issuer-specific credit spreads. For
mortgage borrowers, changes in the value of the underlying asset financed will affect
the decision to refinance a mortgage and therefore call an MBS bond. Therefore,
estimates of interest rate risk using effective duration and effective convexity are not
necessarily improved by choosing a smaller change in benchmark rates. Curve-based
interest rate risk measures have become an important tool in the financial analysis of
not only traditional bonds but also financial liabilities.

327

328

Learning Module 13

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
Curve-Based and Empirical Fixed-Income Risk Measures

EXAMPLE 2

Using Effective Duration and Convexity to Estimate BondsвҖҷ
Price Changes Given Benchmark Rate Changes
Continuing from Example 1, to bolster your recommendation that the portfolio
manager (PM) not buy the callable bond trading at 101.060, you want to demonstrate the price impact of the bondвҖҷs negative effective convexity. You assume
the benchmark government par curve increases and decreases by 100 bps and
use Equation 3, with EffDur and EffCon estimates based on bond prices from
your option valuation model, to derive the following results:
вҖў %вҲҶPVFull вүҲ (вҖ“7.601 Г— 0.01) + [ВҪ Г— вҖ“285.168 Г— (0.0100)2] = вҖ“9.03%.
вҖў %вҲҶPVFull вүҲ (вҖ“7.601 Г— вҖ“0.01) + [ВҪ Г— вҖ“285.168 Г— (вҖ“0.0100)2] = 6.17%.
In discussing these results with the PM, you conclude that the negative effective convexity adds to the bondвҖҷs price decline when benchmark rates increase
and subtracts from the bondвҖҷs price rise when benchmark rates decrease. If the
PMвҖҷs forecast is an equal probability that the benchmark par curve will increase
or decrease, the PM would not invest. However, if the PMвҖҷs forecast is that the
probability for the benchmark decreasing is greater, such that expected gain is
greater than zero, she may decide to invest in the bond.
QUESTION SET
Questions 1вҖ“5 relate to the following information:
As a fixed-income analyst, you are asked to consider the impact of the benchmark
government par curve shifting upward by 200 bps on two bonds, as part of an
internal stress scenario. From a bond pricing model, the following information
on effective duration and effective convexity were obtained.
Bond A: Effective duration = 9.369; Effective convexity = вҖ“353.752.
Bond B: Effective duration = 8.517; Effective convexity = вҖ“321.756.
1. Calculate the estimated percentage change in the full price of bond A for the
200 bps curve shift.
Solution:

вҖӢ21 вҖӢГ— EffCon Г— вҖӢ(О”Curve)вҖӢ2вҖӢ]вҖӢ.вҖӢ
	вҖӢ%О”P вҖӢVвҖӢFullвҖӢ вүҲ вҖӢ(вҲ’ EffDur Г— О”Curve)вҖӢ+ вҖӢ[_
	вҖӢ%О”P вҖӢVвҖӢFullвҖӢ вүҲ вҖӢ(вҲ’ 9.369 Г— 0.02)вҖӢ+ [вҖӢ _
вҖӢ12 вҖӢГ— вҲ’ 353.752 Г— вҖӢ(0.02)вҖӢ2вҖӢ]вҖӢ.вҖӢ
%О”PVFull вүҲ вҲ’25.81%.
2. Calculate the estimated percentage change in the full price of Bond B for the
200 bps curve shift.
Solution:

вҖӢ21 вҖӢГ— EffCon Г— вҖӢ(О”Curve)вҖӢ2вҖӢ]вҖӢ.вҖӢ
	вҖӢ%О”P вҖӢVвҖӢFullвҖӢ вүҲ вҖӢ(вҲ’ EffDur Г— О”Curve)вҖӢ+ вҖӢ[_
	вҖӢ%О”P вҖӢVвҖӢFullвҖӢ вүҲ вҖӢ(вҲ’ 8.517 Г— 0.02)вҖӢ+ вҖӢ[_
вҖӢ12 вҖӢГ— вҲ’ 321.756 Г— вҖӢ(0.02)вҖӢ2вҖӢ]вҖӢ.вҖӢ
%О”PVFull вүҲ вҲ’23.47%.

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
Key Rate Duration as a Measure of Yield Curve Risk

329

3. Based on Questions 1 and 2, if both bonds were in a portfolio and a decision
to sell one of them had to be made in light of a forecast of sharply rising
interest rates, recommend Bond A or Bond B to sell. Justify your answer.
Solution:

Sell Bond A since it has the more negative percentage change in the full
price of the bond. For every 200 bps increase in the benchmark curve, the
full price of the bond drops 25.81%.
4. If you were forecasting the benchmark yield curve to shift downward by 200
basis points, recommend Bond A or Bond B to add to the portfolio in anticipation of the curve shift. Justify your answer.
Solution:

Add Bond A, since when you calculate the percentage change in the full
price for Bonds A and B, Bond A has the higher positive percentage change.
%вҲҶPVFull Bond A вүҲ (вҖ“8.517 Г— вҖ“0.02) + [ВҪ Г— вҖ“321.756 Г— (вҖ“0.0200)2]
= 11.66%.
%вҲҶPVFull Bond B вүҲ (вҖ“8.517 Г— вҖ“0.02) + [ВҪ Г— вҖ“321.756 Г— (вҖ“0.0200)2]
= 10.60%.
5. Explain why the estimated percentage change in the price of the bond from
a 200 bps upward shift in the benchmark yield curve is more than twice the
estimated percentage change in the price of the bond from a 200 bps downward yield curve shift.
Solution:

Because effective convexity is negative, an upward shift in the yield curve
results in a higher absolute price change than a downward shift in the yield
curve. For the upward shift, the duration contribution is positive and convexity contribution is negative, offsetting each other.

KEY RATE DURATION AS A MEASURE OF YIELD CURVE
RISK
define key rate duration and describe its use to measure price
sensitivity of fixed-income instruments to benchmark yield curve
changes
As we have seen, effective duration measures a bondвҖҷs sensitivity to changes in the
benchmark yield curve if all yields change by the same amount. Key rate duration
provides further insight into a bondвҖҷs sensitivity to non-parallel benchmark yield curve
changes. Key rate duration (or partial duration) is a measure of a bondвҖҷs sensitivity to
a change in the benchmark yield at a specific maturity. Such a measure is important
to isolate the price responses of bonds to changes in the rates of key maturities on
the benchmark yield curve.

4

330

Learning Module 13

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
Curve-Based and Empirical Fixed-Income Risk Measures

Key rate durations define a securityвҖҷs price sensitivity over a set of maturities
along the yield curve, with the sum of key rate durations being equal to the effective
duration, as shown in Equations 4 and 5:
1
_
	вҖӢKeyRateDu вҖӢrвҖӢkвҖӢ = вҲ’ вҖӢ_
PV вҖӢГ— вҖӢО” вҖӢrвҖӢ вҖӢвҖӢ ;вҖӢ	
О”PV

(4)

k

n

	вҖӢвҲ‘вҖӢKeyRateDu вҖӢrвҖӢkвҖӢ = EffDur,вҖӢ	

(5)

k=1

where rk represents the kth key rate. In contrast to effective duration, key rate
durations help identify вҖңshaping riskвҖқ for a bondвҖ”that is, a bondвҖҷs sensitivity to
changes in the shape of the benchmark yield curve (e.g., the yield curve becoming
steeper or flatter or twisting).
The procedure for the calculation of key rate durations is similar to that used in
the calculation of effective duration, but instead of shifting the entire benchmark yield
curve, only key points on the curve are shifted, one at a time, as shown in Exhibit 3.
The kth key rate, which could be a 0.5-, 2-, 5-, 10-, 20-, or 30-year rate, is shifted up
(as shown in Exhibit 3) and down by 1 bp, and then new bond prices are generated
(PV+ and PVвҖ“) and the key rate duration at that specific maturity is calculated using
Equation 4. Thus, the effective duration for each maturity point shift is calculated in
isolation.

Exhibit 3: Key Rate Shift
О”Yield

Key rate shift

О”r k

kвҖ“1

k

k+1

Term

Exhibit 4 depicts the process of successively shifting the benchmark rate up and
down at each of the key maturities along the benchmark yield to generate the key
rate duration at maturity.

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
Key Rate Duration as a Measure of Yield Curve Risk

Exhibit 4: Key Rate Shifts across the Benchmark Yield Curve
Yield

0.5

2

5

10

20

30

Term

As for practical uses of key rate duration, the analyst may want to know how the price
of a callable bond is expected to change if short-term benchmark ratesвҖ”for example,
the rate on the two-year Treasury note, with modified duration of 1.99вҖ”rise by 25 bps
but longer-maturity benchmark rates remain unchanged. Given that the yield curve
is upward sloping, this scenario represents a flattening of the curve.
Equation 6 rearranges terms from Equation 4 to solve for вҲҶPV/PV (or %вҲҶPVFull):
О”PV
_
	вҖӢ PV вҖӢ = вҲ’ KeyRateDu вҖӢrвҖӢkвҖӢГ— О” вҖӢrвҖӢkвҖӢ.вҖӢ	

(6)

Using Equation 6, the expected estimated price change would be -0.4975%:
вҲҶPV/PV = вҖ“1.99 Г— 0.0025.
Now, consider the simple portfolio of government bonds shown in Exhibit 5.

Exhibit 5: Simple Government Bond Portfolio
Tenor
(Years)

Coupon

Annualized
Yield (%)

Price

Position Size

Modified
Duration

Key Rate
Duration

2

0.00

0.50

99.006

$99,006,219

1.990

0.711

5

0.00

1.25

93.960

$93,959,580

4.938

1.675

10

0.00

1.75

84.010

$84,009,625

9.828

2.981

$276,975,424

5.368

5.368

Assume the portfolio is weighted by the prices of the respective 2-, 5-, and 10-year
bonds for a total portfolio value of $293 million, or $1 million Г— (99.50 + 98.31 +
95.43). The portfolioвҖҷs modified duration is calculated as
5.345 = [1.991 Г— (99.5/293.2)] + [4.869 Г— (98.3/293.2)] + [9.333 Г— (95.4/293.2)].
Alternatively, we could calculate each key rate duration by maturity. For example, the
two-year key rate duration (KeyRateDur2) is
0.676 = 1.991 Г— (99.5/293.2).

Note that the three key rate duration values sum to the portfolio duration value of 5.345.
If we assume this portfolio represents an вҖңindex,вҖқ then a manager attempting to
outperform the index could vary (or tilt) the key rate durations to capitalize on her
view of expected changes in the shape of the benchmark yield curve, as demonstrated
in the following example.

331

332

Learning Module 13

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
Curve-Based and Empirical Fixed-Income Risk Measures

EXAMPLE 3

Using Key Rate Duration Estimate Interest Rate Risk for
Bonds in a Portfolio
Continuing from Example 2, the portfolio manager asks you to determine if
the bond portfolio may need rebalancing to improve overall return, given the
tenor of the portfolioвҖҷs bonds, key rate duration information, and forecasted
benchmark government par curve shifts at the various maturities. All four bonds
have the same benchmark government par curve. Current information for the
bonds are as follows:
вҖӢ

Bond

Tenor

Position Size

Key Rate Duration

A

1 year

$200,565,245

0.645

B

5 years

$201,042,132

1.483

C

10 years

$202,673,298

2.158

D

20 years

$202,588,801

2.982

вҖӢ

Information on the forecasted benchmark government par curve changes at the
various maturities are as follows:
вҖӢ

Maturity

1 year

5 years

10 years

20 years

Expected
change

вҖ“23 bps

вҖ“25 bps

вҖ“18 bps

вҖ“10 bps

вҖӢ

If we take the product of the key rate duration and curve shift at a certain maturity, we can forecast the change in the price of the bond. For example, for the
one-year maturity, this would be вҖ“0.645 Г— вҖ“0.0023 = 0.148%. The calculation
for all the bonds is shown below:
вҖӢ

Maturities
% change in
bond price

1 year (Bond
A)

5 years (Bond
B)

10 years
(Bond C)

20 years
(Bond D)

0.148%

0.371%

0.388%

0.298%

вҖӢ

Therefore, since the forecasted price change in the bonds favor Bonds B and C,
it would be advisable to increase the weightings for these bonds, taking more
from the Bond A position than the Bond D position, since Bond A is forecasted
to give the least gain of all the bonds.
QUESTION SET
Questions 1вҖ“3 relate to the following information.
The analysis you performed previously on the consideration of the impact of the
benchmark government par curve increasing by 200 bps on two bonds has now
been expanded for a more complicated scenario. You are asked to consider the
scenario of a non-parallel shift in the benchmark government par curve, where
a steepening of the curve is occurring at longer maturities. Below are the details
on non-parallel shifts to the benchmark government par curve:

Empirical Duration

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.

333

вҖӢ

Maturity

1 year

5 years

10 years

20 years

30 years

Expected
change

+100 bps

+150 bps

+200 bps

+250 bps

+300 bps

вҖӢ

Relevant details on the two bonds are as follows:
вҖӢ

Tenor

Key Rate Duration

Bond A

5 years

2.702

Bond B

10 years

3.953

вҖӢ

1. Based on the information above, identify which bond will have a greater
percentage change in its price due to the benchmark par curve shift.
Solution

Bond B.
For Bond A, вҲҶPV/PV = вҖ“2.702 Г— 0.015 = вҖ“4.05%.
For Bond B, вҲҶPV/PV = вҖ“3.953 Г— 0.020 = вҖ“7.91%.
2. If the values in the table above on the non-parallel yield curve shifts were
forecasts and your portfolio contains equal positions in the two bonds,
which of the following would be the best course of action?
A. Sell Bond A.
B. Sell Bond B.
C. Sell both Bond A and Bond B.
Solution
C is correct. Sell both Bonds A and B, since both are expected to see price
declines.
3. Explain why key rate durations might be useful for a portfolio manager even
though key rate duration values of the bonds in a portfolio sum to the portfolio duration.
Solution

Knowing the portfolio duration and overall movement of the benchmark
yield curve can provide a quick estimate of gains or losses; however, by using
key rate durations, a portfolio manager can over- or underweight specific
tenors to maximize risk-adjusted return.

EMPIRICAL DURATION
describe the difference between empirical duration and analytical
duration
The approaches taken so far to estimate duration and convexity statistics using mathematical formulas is often referred to as analytical duration; the measures we have
covered are summarized in Exhibit 6. Importantly, estimates of the impact of benchmark yield changes on bond prices using analytical duration implicitly assume that

5

334

Learning Module 13

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
Curve-Based and Empirical Fixed-Income Risk Measures

government bond yields and spreads are independent variables and are uncorrelated.
Analytical duration offers a reasonable approximation of the priceвҖ“yield relationship
in many situations.

Exhibit 6: Curve-Based and Empirical Duration Measures
Measure

Definition

Interpretation

Approximate
Modified
Duration

Estimates the slope of the line tangent to a bondвҖҷs priceвҖ“yield curve

Yield-based method to estimate
modified duration

Effective
Duration

Sensitivity of a bondвҖҷs price to a
change in a benchmark yield curve

Curve-based method to estimate
modified duration for complex
bonds with uncertain cash flows

Key Rate

Measures bond sensitivity to a
benchmark yield change for a specific maturity

Partial duration statistic that gauges
a bondвҖҷs sensitivity to non-parallel
benchmark yield curve changes

Empirical

Measure using historical data in
statistical models and incorporating factors affecting bond prices
to determine the priceвҖ“yield
relationship

Statistical estimate that accounts for
correlation between yield spreads
and benchmark yield-to-maturity
changes under different economic
scenarios

However, in practice, there is another important type of duration: Fixed-income
professionals often use historical data in statistical models that incorporate various
factors affecting bond prices to calculate empirical duration estimates (see Exhibit 6).
These estimates are calculated over time and in different interest rate environments
to inform the fixed-income portfolio decision-making process.
For instance, during crises, investors typically sell risky assets and purchase government bonds. Such a вҖңflight to qualityвҖқ can cause government benchmark yields to
fall while credit spreads widen. Exhibit 7 depicts the flight to quality during the onset
of the COVID-19 pandemic at the end of February 2020.

Exhibit 7: 10-Year US Treasury Yield vs. US Corporate BB Credit Spread, Q1
2020
8%
7%
6%
5%
4%
3%
2%
1%
0%
12/31/19

1/14/20

1/28/20

2/11/20

10-year treasury

2/25/20

3/10/20

BB yield spread

3/24/20

Empirical Duration

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.

During such periods, we might expect analytical and empirical duration estimates to
differ. For a government bond with little or no credit risk, we would expect analytical
and empirical duration to be similar because benchmark yield changes largely drive
bond prices. Conversely, credit spreads (and liquidity spreads) would widen because
of an increase in expected default risk. Since credit spreads and benchmark yields
are negatively correlated under this scenario, wider credit spreads will partially or
fully offset the decline in government benchmark yields, resulting in lower empirical
duration estimates than analytical duration estimates (in other words, the expected
increase in a bondвҖҷs price from declining government benchmark yields is offset by a
decrease in price from widening credit spreads). Analysts must consider the correlation
between benchmark yields and credit spreads when deciding whether to use empirical
or analytical duration estimates.
EXAMPLE 4

Viswan Family OfficeвҖҷs Corporate Bond PortfolioвҖ”
Empirical vs. Analytical Duration
In addition to equity holdings, the Viswan Family Office (VFO) manages a
government bond portfolio and a corporate bond portfolio. Positions in the
government bond portfolio are mainly medium-term US Treasury securities
but also include debt of other highly rated developed-market sovereign issuers.
About half of the corporate bond portfolio is invested in investment-grade issues,
and the other half consists of high-yield issues, with a mix of maturities and a
mix of North American, European, and Asian companies.
Explain why empirical duration is likely to be a more relevant interest rate
risk measure for VFOвҖҷs corporate bond portfolio than for its government bond
portfolio.
Solution:
The government bond portfolio includes debt securities of the US government
and other highly rated developed-market sovereign issuers. Since benchmark
yields are the primary driver of changes in overall bond yields in this portfolio,
the results of analytical duration and empirical duration should be broadly similar.
The corporate bond portfolio includes a wide variety of debt securities with
varying levels of credit quality and liquidity risk and, therefore, different credit
and liquidity spreads.
Correlations between benchmark yield changes and the sizes of the credit
and liquidity spreads are negative, particularly during stressed market conditions,
such that during such times, lower benchmark yields are more than offset by
higher credit and liquidity spreads. So, for the lower-quality corporate bonds,
yields increase, which makes their empirical duration significantly lower than
their analytical duration.
Consequently, empirical duration, not analytical duration, is the more accurate interest rate risk measure for the corporate bond portfolio.
QUESTION SET
1. When comparing analytical duration and empirical duration, which
of the following statements is correct?
A. Empirical duration and convexity are estimated duration and convexity
statistics using mathematical formulas.

335

336

Learning Module 13

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
Curve-Based and Empirical Fixed-Income Risk Measures

B. Analytical duration and convexity are estimated using historical data
in non-statistical models that incorporate various factors affecting
bond prices.
C. Neither A nor B
Solution:
C is correct.
A is incorrect because it is analytical, not empirical, duration and convexity
that are measured using mathematical formulas.
B is incorrect because it is empirical, not analytical, duration and convexity
that are estimated using historical data in non-statistical models that incorporate various factors affecting bond prices.
2. True or false: Empirical duration estimates provide better estimates than the
analytical duration estimates for bonds that have credit risk.
Solution:

True. Macroeconomic factors drive government bond yields lower in a
market stress scenario, and the flight to safety will cause high-yield bond
credit spreads to widen because of an increase in expected default risk.
Since credit spreads and benchmark yields are negatively correlated under
this scenario, wider credit spreads will partially or fully offset the decline in
government benchmark yields. Analytical duration, however, assumes that
benchmark yields and spreads are uncorrelated. Empirical duration estimates are a more accurate method of forecasting for bonds with credit risk.
3. Identify some of the challenges that may be encountered in estimating empirical duration.
Solution:

Empirical duration estimation utilizes historical data based on multiple
factors. What factors to use and not use, what weight to give the factors,
and how to weight current data versus older data (e.g., the time period to
measure duration) are some challenges.

Practice Problems

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.

PRACTICE PROBLEMS
The following information relates to questions
1-8
An investorвҖҷs well-diversified portfolio has $200,000 in cash. The investor aims
to invest in short-term, one-year Large-Cap Company bonds, prior to using the
cash to invest in an upcoming IPO. There are currently two Large-Cap Company bonds on the market to purchase, both with one-year maturities. One of
the bonds, Bond A, is a non-callable bond, while Bond B is a callable bond. As a
fixed-income analyst, you are asked to conduct an analysis.
1. For the two bonds offered by Large-Cap Company, which duration calculation
would be the most appropriate to use to measure interest rate risk?
A. Modified duration
B. Macaulay duration
C. Effective duration
2. For Bond B, as the benchmark yield curve declines, the slope of the line tangent
to the bond flattens as the benchmark yield declines and reaches an inflection
point, after which the effective convexity becomes:
A. positive.
B. negative.
C. neither positive nor negative.
3. The following information on Bonds A and B was obtained:
Bond

Effective
Duration

Effective
Convexity

A

7.48621

29.35972

B

7.23852

вҖ“321.75618

Compare the interest rate risk of Bond A and Bond B.
A. Bond A is riskier than Bond B.
B. Bond B is riskier than Bond A.
C. Bond A and Bond B have approximately the same interest rate risk.
4. For the percentage price change for Bond A, given a 200 bp increase in benchmark yield, what part of the price change is of the most concern?
A. Duration
B. Convexity
C. Not able to determine with given information

337

338

Learning Module 13

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
Curve-Based and Empirical Fixed-Income Risk Measures

5. A colleague asks whether you also considered looking at the key rate durations
when comparing the interest rate risks of Bond A and Bond B. Would research
into key rate durations for Bond A and Bond B help you make a better decision
about the interest rate risk of the two bonds?
A. Yes
B. No
C. Inconclusive
6. The investorвҖҷs portfolio is diversified, and the fixed-income component of the
portfolio has bonds of various maturities, with a duration of 7.48621. What
would happen to the effective duration of the fixed-income component of the
investorвҖҷs portfolio if Bond A is added to the portfolio?
A. It would increase.
B. If would decrease.
C. It would stay the same.
7. For the two bonds under consideration, would analytical duration estimates or
empirical duration estimates be most appropriate in conducting your analysis?
A. Analytical duration estimates
B. Empirical duration estimates
C. Either type of estimate would be appropriate.
8. What impact would a вҖңflight to safetyвҖқ (i.e., government bond yields falling and
credit spreads widening) have on the analytical duration estimate of Bond A?
A. Decreased duration
B. Increased duration
C. No impact

Solutions

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.

SOLUTIONS
1. C is correct. Since Bond B is callable, it has an embedded option, and effective
duration is the most appropriate duration measure. Effective duration also works
on bonds without embedded options and would allow the analyst to compare the
interest rate risk of the two bonds.
2. B is correct. Since the bond is callable, after a certain point on the yield curve,
the issuer will exercise the call and the owner will not be able to realize additional
gains from declines in the benchmark yield curve.
3. B is correct. Bond B is riskier since the 200 bps upward shift in the yield curve
results in a greater percentage price decrease, owing to its negative effective
convexity:
%вҲҶPVFull Bond A вүҲ (вҖ“7.48621 Г— 0.0100) + [ВҪ Г— 29.35972 Г— (вҖ“0.0100)2]
= вҖ“7.33941%.
%вҲҶPVFull Bond B вүҲ (вҖ“7.23853 Г— 0.0100) + [ВҪ Г— вҖ“321.75618 Г— (0.0100)2]
= вҖ“8.84730%.
4. A is correct. Typically, the effect of duration is much larger than the effect of
convexity.
%вҲҶPVFull Bond A, Duration вүҲ вҖ“7.48621 Г— 0.0200 = вҖ“14.97242%.
%вҲҶPVFull Bond A, Convexity Adjustment вүҲ ВҪ Г— 29.35972 Г— (вҖ“0.0200)2
= вҖ“0.58719%.
5. B is correct. Since both bonds mature in one year, key rate duration analysis
would not give you any additional insight, since both bonds would undergo the
same shift in the curve.
6. C is correct. Bond A has the same effective duration as the portfolio effective
duration.
7. B is correct. Since both Bond A and Bond B are corporate bonds, they have credit
risk, and as such, empirical duration would be the most appropriate because
benchmark yields and credit spreads may not be positively correlated.
8. C is correct. There would be no impact on the analytical duration estimate. However, an empirical duration estimate would be impacted. A flight to safety would
result in an increase in the bond price due to the falling benchmark yield being
offset by widening credit spread. This would lead to a lower empirical duration
than analytical duration.

339

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.

LEARNING MODULE

14

Credit Risk
LEARNING OUTCOMES
Mastery

The candidate should be able to:
describe credit risk and its components, probability of default and
loss given default
describe the uses of ratings from credit rating agencies and their
limitations
describe macroeconomic, market, and issuer-specific factors that
influence the level and volatility of yield spreads

INTRODUCTION
Credit analysis plays a critical role in fixed-income markets. Proper evaluation and
pricing of credit risk facilitates the efficient allocation of capital. This is a dynamic
process as credit risk components are continuously re-evaluated and fixed-income
instruments repriced according to market conditions. This learning module covers
the basic principles of credit analysis. First, we introduce the concepts of credit risk
and expected loss and interpret what credit ratings mean. We compare bond issuer
creditworthiness within a given industry as well as across industries, and we explore
how financial markets price credit risk. This lesson focuses primarily on the analysis of credit risk, while subsequent lessons discuss credit analysis of sovereign and
non-sovereign government issuers as well as corporate debt
LEARNING MODULE OVERVIEW
в– 

Credit risk is the risk of economic loss resulting from borrower
failure to make full and timely payments of interest and principal. The key components of credit risk are the probability of default
and the loss given default, and their product is expected loss.

в– 

Chief sources of credit risk include adverse macroeconomic conditions, a financing mismatch between resources and obligations, and
issuer-specific factors in corporate and sovereign debt markets.

в– 

Nearly every bond issue in developed debt markets carries credit ratings classifying creditworthiness. Credit ratings enable comparisons of
the credit risk of debt issues and issuers within and across industries.

1

342

Learning Module 14

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.

Credit Risk

в– 

Bonds or issuers with an investment-grade (IG) credit rating pose the
lowest risk of default and are rated Baa3 by MoodyвҖҷs and BBBвҖ“ or
higher by S&P and Fitch. In contrast, non-investment-grade or highyield (HY) bonds or issuers are rated BB+ or lower by S&P/Fitch and
Ba1 or less by MoodyвҖҷs and represent substantial to very high credit
risk.

в– 

Pitfalls of relying solely on credit ratings in making investment decisions include that rating agency decisions may lag market pricing of
credit risk, overlook key financial risks, and/or involve miscalculations
or unforeseen changes not fully captured in a rating agencyвҖҷs forward-looking analysis.

в– 

The premium, or yield spread, at which corporate bonds trade relative
to default risk-free assets widens when credit risk rises and narrows if
credit risk falls.

в– 

Credit spread changes affect holding period returns via two primary
factors: a) the basis point spread change and b) the sensitivity of price
to yield as reflected by end-of-period modified duration and convexity.
Spread narrowing increases holding period returns.

LEARNING MODULE SELF-ASSESSMENT
These initial questions are intended to help you gauge your current level
of understanding of this learning module.
1. Credit risk is:
A. activated upon a borrowerвҖҷs default.
B. the spread an investor receives above the risk-free rate.
C. experienced in several ways by lenders.
Solution:
The correct answer is C. Lenders are impacted by credit risk in several
ways, including failure to receive principal and interest payments in a timely
manner, the inability to sell collateral at a market price sufficient to meet an
issuerвҖҷs obligations in the case of secured debt, or the potential incurrence of
legal or other costs to collect debt. A is incorrect because while a borrower
default initiates a realized loss, expected loss exists prior to the occurrence
of any actual loss. B is incorrect because it refers to the credit spread, which
compensates investors for assuming credit risk.
2. A EUR500,000 loan has the following characteristics:
в– 

Probability of default 5%

в– 

Collateral EUR100,000

в– 

Recovery rate 90%

в– 

Expected exposure EUR400,000

The expected loss for this loan in event of default is:
A. EUR1,500
B. EUR2,000

Introduction

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.

C. EUR20,000
Solution:
The correct answer is A. We solve for expected loss (EL) as follows:
EL = POD Г— (EE вҖ“ Collateral) Г— (1 вҖ“ RR).
Since probability of default (POD) is 5%, expected exposure (EE) is
EUR400,000, collateral is EUR100,000, and the recovery rate (RR) is 90%:
EL = EUR1,500 = 0.05 Г— (400,000 вҖ“ 100,000) Г— (1 вҖ“ 0.9).
B is incorrect as it fails to reduce the expected exposure by the collateral,
while C is incorrect as it simply multiplies EE and POD.
3. Credit ratings are:
A. developed on behalf of investors.
B. a symbol-based measure of the potential default risk of a bond issue or
issuer.
C. measures of credit risk that are used to determine bond market
pricing.
Solution:
The correct answer is B: Credit ratings are a symbol-based measure of the
potential default risk of a bond issue or issuer. A is incorrect because credit
ratings are developed on behalf of the issuer. C is incorrect because credit
ratings are not used to determine bond prices.
4. Which of the following statements best describes risks that are difficult to
capture in credit ratings?
A. Environmental risks are captured by ESG ratings rather than credit
ratings.
B. Debt-financed acquisitions are usually captured in credit ratings.
C. Split ratings demonstrate that credit rating agencies may view complex
risks very differently.
Solution:
The correct answer is C. A is incorrect as environmental risks may affect
credit ratings. B is incorrect since debt-financed acquisitions are difficult to
anticipate.
5. Determine the correct answers to fill in the blanks: Spreads are __________ at
or near the top of the credit cycle, when market participants perceive credit
risk to be at its lowest; they are __________ at or near the bottom of the
credit cycle, when financial markets believe credit risk has reached its peak.
Solution:

Spreads are narrowest (or lowest) at or near the top of the credit cycle,
when market participants perceive credit risk to be at its lowest; they are
widest (or highest) at or near the bottom of the credit cycle, when financial
markets believe credit risk has reached its peak.
6. A portfolio manager assessing a downside case believes that HY bond
spreads will rise 100 bps in a recession. If an observed HY bond has modi-

343

344

Learning Module 14

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.

Credit Risk

fied duration of 4.5 and reported convexity of 0.23, the expected change in
the HY bondвҖҷs price under this scenario would be closest to:
A. вҖ“4.5%.
B. вҖ“4.385%.
C. вҖ“4.615%.
Solution:
The correct answer is B. Bond price changes based upon modified duration,
convexity, and the spread change are calculated as follows:
%вҲҶPVFull = вҲ’(AnnModDur Г— вҲҶSpread) + ВҪAnnConvexity Г— (вҲҶSpread)2.
With AnnModDur = 4.5 and reported convexity of 0.23, rescaling convexity
to 23 and substituting values to solve for spread results in
вҲҶPVFull = вҲ’ (4.5 Г— 1.00%) + ВҪ (23) Г— (1.00%)2
вҲҶPVFull = вҲ’4.385%.

2

SOURCES OF CREDIT RISK
describe credit risk and its components, probability of default and
loss given default
Fixed-income investors face credit risk, a form of performance risk in a contractual
relationship. A borrower that fails to meet its promised interest and/or principal payment obligations under a bond or loan contract is said to be in default. A fixed-income
investor seeks compensation for the expected economic loss under a potential borrower
default over the life of the contract known as credit risk.
Credit risk depends upon specific factors related to the borrower itself as well as
general economic conditions and is subject to change over the life of the contract.
Credit risk exposes the lender or investor to potential losses and underperformance.
Traditionally, many analysts evaluated creditworthiness based on what are often
called the вҖңCs of credit analysis,вҖқ as shown in Exhibit 1:

Sources of Credit Risk

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.

Exhibit 1: The Cs of Credit Analysis
Top-Down Factors

Country

Capacity

Conditions

Cs of
Credit

Capital

Currency

Collateral

Covenants
Character
Bottom-Up Factors

Five of these criteriaвҖ”capacity, capital, collateral, covenants, and characterвҖ”are related
to the specific bottom-up factors applicable to an individual borrower. Capacity refers
to the ability of the borrower to make its debt payments on time. Capital addresses
other company resources available that reduce reliance on debt. Collateral refers to the
quality and value of the assets supporting the issuerвҖҷs indebtedness, while covenants
are the legal terms of debt agreements that an issuer must comply with. Character
refers to the quality of management and the willingness of repay indebtedness.
While capacity and capital are generally quantitative metrics based on financial
statements, collateral, covenants, and character are largely qualitative measures that
analysts assess based on historical company performance, credit relationships and
the reputation of current management.
The remaining three criteriaвҖ”conditions, country, and currencyвҖ”involve general
top-down factors that apply to all borrowers to a greater or lesser extent. Conditions
refers to the general economic, competitive, and business environment faced by all
borrowers that may affect their ability to service or refinance debt. Country involves
the geopolitical environment as well as the legal and political system faced by all issuers
in a jurisdiction that may affect debt payment. Currency affects issuers whose cash
flows are affected by exchange rate changes or who borrow in a currency outside of
their jurisdiction, such as sovereign issuers with foreign currency debt.
A borrowerвҖҷs inability to make timely payments may be due to several underlying
and contributing factors, but it ultimately results from a lack of sufficient cash available
to make a current debt payment. Lenders, as fixed-income investors, are impacted
by credit risk. They may lose some or all of the principal and interest due, suffering a
capital loss or income shortfall. This disruption to their cash flows may impact their
own ability to repay debt, and payment delays as well as increased legal and collection
costs may further reduce their income and margins.

345

346

Learning Module 14

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.

Credit Risk

Sources of Credit Risk
Changes in credit risk due to issuer-based or overall economic conditions are affected
by the source of repayment, which differs among issuer types. Exhibit 2 shows the
main sources of repayment for corporate and sovereign bonds.

Exhibit 2: Sovereign and Corporate Bond Sources of Repayment
Operating
Cash Flows
Secured
Corporate Bond

Bond
Investor

Operating
Cash Flows

Unsecured
Corporate Bond

Bond
Investor

Tax
Revenues

Sovereign
Bond

Bond
Investor

Collateral
Cash Flows
or Sale

A corporation may not generate sufficient cash flow from its operations, financing
activities, and investments to make timely payments on its debt, increasing the risk of
default. Similarly, a sovereign borrower may not generate sufficient revenue through
taxes, incomes, and fees to make timely payments.
Borrowers that lack the resources to meet debt obligations as they come due
are often described as illiquid. An illiquid borrower is unable to raise the necessary
funds to fulfill a debt obligation. They may not be able to tap credit lines, sell assets,
or otherwise raise funding to make a timely debt payment. That is different from an
insolvent borrower whose assets are worth less than its liabilities. An illiquid borrower
just does not have, or is unable to secure, the liquidity needed to make timely payment.
Credit risk analysis focuses on understanding how a borrower generates cash,
how and when cash is used, and what events and risks may impede the borrowerвҖҷs
ability to repay the debt. In earlier lessons, we encountered unsecured debt, where
the primary source of repayment is the cash flow generated by the business. In the
case of secured debt, the primary source of repayment remains the firmвҖҷs cash flows,
but it is also supported by collateral pledged by the company. The following example
involves an investor considering an unsecured bond versus a secured bond.
EXAMPLE 1

Risk Comparison of BRWA and VIVU Notes
The hypothetical car manufacturer Bright Wheel Automotive (BRWA) is an
investment-grade (IG) issuer with ready access to unsecured debt, while Vivivyu
Inc. (VIVU) is a hypothetical high-yield (HY) issuer that borrows on a secured
basis. Let us compare 3.2% senior unsecured and unsubordinated BRWA notes
to 6.5% secured unsubordinated VIVU notes. Consider BRWAвҖҷs debt profile:

Sources of Credit Risk

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.

вҖӢ

BRWA Corporation Debt Profile
вҖӢ

Debt
Outstanding/
Availability

0.12% BRWA
150-day
Commercial Paper

Unsecured
364 Day
Facility

3.2% BRWA
Five-Year
Notes

Unsecured
3-year
Revolving
Credit
Facility

3.95% BRWA
Fifteen-Year
Notes

1

2

5

10

30

Years to
Maturity

If BRWA fails to make an interest or principal payment on the note, BRWA
is in default. Since its bonds are unsecured and unsubordinated obligations with
pari passu and cross-default language in its bond indenture, failure to repay
unsecured indebtedness means that all its debt obligations are in default and
investors must rely on BRWAвҖҷs general asset pool to satisfy their obligations,
as shown below.
Other
Unsecured
Claims
Unsecured
364 Day
Facility

Unsecured claims
(pari passu)

Unsecured
3-Year
Revolver

0.12% BRWA
150-Day
Commercial Paper

3.2% BRWA
Five-Year
Notes

3.95% BRWA
Fifteen-Year
Notes

BRWA General Assets

As an HY issuer, on the other hand, VIVU is limited to secured debt market
access, as shown in its debt profile.

347

348

Learning Module 14

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.

Credit Risk

вҖӢ

VIVU Debt Profile
вҖӢ

Debt
Outstanding/
Availability

Secured
2-year
Credit
Facility

6.5% VIVU
Seven-Year
Callable Notes
Five-Year
Term Loan A
MRR + 200 bp

Secured
Working
Capital
Facility

1

2

5

10

30

Years to
Maturity

Note: MRR stands for market reference rate.

VIVUвҖҷs failure to make timely payments due on the note will also result in
default. The pari passu clause and cross-default language in its bond indenture
with other unsecured indebtedness also sends all VIVU debt obligations into
default. While all of VIVUвҖҷs debt investors have access to any unpledged assets,
specific pledged assets serve as a secondary source of repayment for specific
debt, as shown below.
VIVU Unpledged Assets

Secured claims
(pari passu)
Secured Working
Capital Facility

Pledged
Inventory

Secured 2-Year
Credit Facility

Five-Year
Term Loan A
MRR + 200 bp

6.5% VIVU
Seven-Year
Callable Notes

Pledged
Assets

In this example, VIVUвҖҷs secured claims include its working capital facility
secured by short-term assets (in this case inventory), while its long-term secured
debt including the callable notes are backed by a claim to specific long-term
assets pledged. As a secondary source of repayment, only when the value of the
pledged assets falls below the total amount of pari passu secured debt will VIVU
noteholders begin to suffer a credit loss.
While the likelihood of default for investment-grade borrowers, such as
BRWA, is typically well below that of a high-yield issuer such as VIVU, the
investorвҖҷs loss in the event of a default for secured debt is usually lower than
unsecured debt due to the secondary source of repayment for secured bonds.
We encountered the Government of RomaniaвҖҷs EUR1.95 billion 30-year debt issue
in an earlier lesson. For a sovereign government, the right to tax economic activity
within its borders means that the sources of repayment are the personal and corporate
income taxes, sales taxes, and other revenue generated by the government. In the

Sources of Credit Risk

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.

349

specific case of RomaniaвҖҷs EUR-denominated debt, the governmentвҖҷs ability to generate
reserve currency cash flows based upon its institutional and economic profile, use of
monetary and fiscal policy, and exchange rate regime are additional considerations.
The main borrower types and their primary sources of repayment and credit risk
are listed in Exhibit 3.

Exhibit 3: Borrower Types, Sources of Repayment, and Sources of Credit Risk

Borrower Type
Corporate

Sovereign or public
entity

Primary Source of Cash Flow
Generation

Secondary Source of Cash
Flow Generation

Sources of Credit Risk

в– 

Business operations

в– 

Asset sales

в– 

Economic contraction

в– 

Investment and financing
activities

в– 

Divestitures

в– 

в– 

Additional debt issuance

Strategic shifts in the business
and market environment

в– 

Equity issuance

в– 

Increased competition

в– 

Reduced pricing power

в– 

Shrinking operating margins,
increased losses

в– 

Excessive debt service needs

в– 

в– 

Corporate and personal
income taxes, sales tax and
VAT revenue, capital gains
and wealth-based taxes

в– 

Newly issued debt

в– 

Economic contraction

в– 

Sale of public assets,
privatization

в– 

Political uncertainty

в– 

Excessive debt service needs

в– 

Expansionary economic
policies

в– 

Budget deficits

в– 

Tax cuts

в– 

Limited ability to collect taxes

Tariffs, fees, and other government revenue

While many factors affect the primary and secondary sources of repayment for different
fixed-income issuers, investors seek to measure and compare credit risk among different
borrowers for similar maturities as well as across maturities for the same borrower.
For example, consider the comparison of BRWA and VIVU notes in Example 1.
If we set aside both the VIVU maturity difference and call feature (which the issuer
may exercise any time from year three through maturity in year seven) by assuming
a similar expected maturity to the BRWA bond for the time being, compare the 6.5%
VIVU debt coupon to the 3.2% fixed rate of the BRWA bond. How can we assess
whether the additional 3.3% (= 6.5% вҲ’ 3.2%) in interest adequately compensates an
investor for the additional risk? We turn to measures of credit risk, which help answer
this question in the next section.

Measuring Credit Risk
Fixed-income investors face credit risk, or the risk that an issuer does not make promised interest and principal payments. This probability-weighted shortfall known as
the expected loss (EL) for a given period has two components, as shown in Exhibit 4.

350

Learning Module 14

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.

Credit Risk

Exhibit 4: Components of Credit Risk
Expected
Exposure (EE)

Total projected exposure
under event of default

Recovery
Rate (RR)
EE Г— (1вҖ“ RR) = LGD

Percentage of loss
recovered in default
Loss Given
Default (LGD)

Amount of loss
if a default occurs
Probability of
Default (POD)

LGD Г— POD = EL

Conditional probability of borrower
default (assuming no prior default)
Expected
Loss (EL)

Probability-weighted
amount of loss

The first is known as the probability of default (POD), which is the likelihood that an
issuer fails to make full and timely payments of principal and interest. The probability
of default is typically an annualized measure.
The second component is the loss given default (LGD), or the investorвҖҷs loss
conditional on an issuer event of default. The loss given default combines the severity
of loss under a default scenario with the amount of the investorвҖҷs claim at the time
of default. The recovery rate (RR) represents the percentage of an outstanding debt
claim recovered when an issuer defaults, while the loss severity of (1 вҲ’ RR) represents
the unrecovered portion of the claim. The size of the investorвҖҷs claim at the time of
default is known as the expected exposure (EE) or exposure at default (EAD). This
is the amount an investor may expect to lose in the case of default, which is usually
equal to the loan or bond face value plus accrued interest less the current market
value of available collateral. In most instances, in the event of default, bondholders
will usually recover some proportion of their investment.
The expected loss is shown in Equation 1:
EL = POD Г— LGD,

(1)

where LGD = EE Г— (1 вҖ“ RR).
The LGD can be expressed either in currency terms (e.g., EUR450,000) or as a
percentage of principal (e.g., 45%). The latter form of expression is more useful for
analysis since it allows comparison across borrowers and investments of different sizes.
One way to interpret the expected loss on a fixed-income security for a given
period is to compare it to the compensation an investor expects for taking on the
credit risk of a borrower over that period, which is the credit spread. Recall from an
earlier lesson that the G-spread is equal to yield spread in basis points over an actual
or interpolated government bond. This approximation may be expressed as follows:
Credit Spread вүҲ POD Г— LGD.

(2)

Therefore, we can say that the investor is fairly compensated if the expected loss is
equal to the credit spread for a given period. The following example uses this information to assess the expected loss versus compensation for the BRWA and VIVU
bonds from Example 1.

Sources of Credit Risk

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.

EXAMPLE 2

Comparing Expected Loss and Credit Spreads
Recall from Example 1 that Bright Wheel Automotive (BRWA) issued an unsecured five-year bond with a 3.2% fixed coupon. The yield-to-maturity difference
between BRWAвҖҷs five-year bond and the comparable US Treasury bond is 90 bps
(= 3.2% вҖ“ 2.3%), which reflects BRWAвҖҷs credit spread over Treasuries, known
as the G-spread. Vivivyu Inc. (VIVU) issued a 6.5% fixed-rate bond, which the
issuer has the right to call at a fixed price any time from three years from the
issuance date until final maturity in seven years.
1. Assuming the BRWA bond has a probability of default of 1% and a loss given
default of 80%, estimate whether BRWA bond investors are adequately compensated for assuming BRWA credit risk.
Solution:

Using Equation 1, we may solve for BRWAвҖҷs expected loss in percentage
terms as follows:
EL = POD Г— LGD, or 0.8% = [0.01 Г— 80%].
Given BRWAвҖҷs credit spread of 0.9%, we may conclude based upon the approximation in Equation 2 that BRWA investors are fairly compensated for
assuming the credit risk since:
Credit Spread > POD Г— LGD.
Investors earn a 90 bps spread per year and have an expected loss of 80 bps
per year.
2. If we assume that VIVU has issued a five-year non-callable bond, as in the
case of BRWA, with a probability of default of 6% and a loss given default
of 50%, compare investor compensation for assuming the credit risk of the
6.5% VIVU debt coupon to that of the 3.2% fixed rate of the BRWA bond.
Solution:

Using Equation 1, we may solve for VIVUвҖҷs expected loss in percentage
terms as follows:
EL = POD Г— LGD, or 3.0% = [0.06 Г— 50%].
We may calculate VIVUвҖҷs five-year credit spread by subtracting its 6.5%
coupon from the 2.3% five-year US Treasury to solve for a G-spread of 4.2%.
Based upon the approximation in Equation 2, we may conclude that VIVU
investors are fairly compensated for assuming the credit risk since:
Credit Spread > POD Г— LGD.
Investors earn a 420 bps per year spread and have an expected loss of 300
bps per year.
3. How would the determination of the spread as well as investorвҖҷs view of the
risk versus compensation for the VIVU bond change from Question 2 if we

351

352

Learning Module 14

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.

Credit Risk

consider the VIVU bondвҖҷs actual maturity and call feature with the original
6.5% coupon?
Solution:

VIVU investors face both call risk and greater maturity risk on the original
bond terms versus a five-year, non-callable bond. As described in earlier
lessons, bonds callable at a fixed price prior to maturity are advantageous to
issuers and disadvantageous to investors, so investors expect to be compensated via a higher yield versus a similar non-callable bond given the uncertain maturity and limited price appreciation known as call risk. This option-adjusted yield is the required market discount rate for which the bondвҖҷs
price is adjusted for the value of the embedded option. Investors would also
expect to be compensated for a longer time to maturity with a higher credit
spread.
We may further consider the drivers of expected loss for BRWAвҖҷs unsecured
investment-grade debt as compared to VIVUвҖҷs secured high-yield debt in Example 2.
The POD is driven by an issuerвҖҷs ability to service debt based on both qualitative and
quantitative factors, including:
в– 

Profitability: Stable, predictable cash flows and profits;

в– 

Coverage: Sufficient cash flows/profits to make debt payments; and

в– 

Leverage: Relative reliance on debt financing.

Higher profitability (as measured, for example, by EBIT margin) and higher coverage (EBIT to interest expense) coupled with lower leverage (debt to earnings or cash
flow ratios, such as debt/EBITDA or cash flow to net debt) are associated with lower
POD and higher credit quality. While financial ratios are one of several factors used
to assess credit risk, and their relative level by rating category varies widely across
industries and over time, Exhibit 5 provides a generic example of these relationships.

Sources of Credit Risk

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.

Exhibit 5: Key Financial Ratios for Corporate Credit Risk and Ratings
EBIT Margin

EBIT to Interest Expense

30%

Aaa
Aa

20%

20

A

Aa

Baa
10%

0%

Aaa

10

Ba
B
Caa
Ca

A
Baa

0

Ba
B

Cash Flow to Net Debt

Debt to EBITDA
8x

Ca
Caa

100%

6x

Aaa

B
4x

Aa
Ba

3x
2x

50%

Baa
A

1x
0

Aa
Aaa

0%

A
Baa
Ba
B

Caa

As Exhibit 5 shows, changes in profitability (EBIT margin), coverage (EBIT to interest expense), and leverage (debt/EBITDA and cash flow to net debt) ratios over time
may result in ratings upgrades or downgrades as well as changing credit spreads. The
LGD for a given exposure, on the other hand, is largely a function of the nature and
seniority of a creditorвҖҷs claim in a default scenario, as shown in Exhibit 6:

353

354

Learning Module 14

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.

Credit Risk

Exhibit 6: Seniority and LGD
Seniority
Highest Ranking

Secured Debt
Lower LGD

Unsecured Debt
Higher LGD

Lowest Ranking

For investors in unsecured investment-grade bonds or loans with a high LGD, the
greatest risk of expected loss arises due to a rise in POD. On the other hand, high-yield
investors expecting a greater likelihood of default seek to minimize EL by seeking
covenant restrictions and/or security to lower LGD.
QUESTION SET
1. Determine the correct answers to fill in the blanks: The two components of credit risk are the _________________, typically measured over
a 12-month horizon, and the _________________, which together with the
recovery rate determine the _________________.
Solution:

The two components of credit risk are the probability of default, typically
measured over a 12-month horizon, and the exposure at default (or expected exposure), which together with the recovery rate determine the loss
given default.
2. Which of the following statements best describes the difference between
unsecured and secured debt obligations in the event of issuer default?
A. Unsecured debtholders only have access to issuer cash flows, while
secured debtholders only have access to specific pledged assets.
B. Both unsecured and secured debtholders have access to unpledged
assets, while only secured debtholders have access to specific pledged
assets as a secondary repayment source.
C. Only unsecured debtholders have access to pledged assets, while only
secured debtholders have access to specific pledged assets.
Solution:
B is correct. While all debtholders receive interest and principal payments
from issuer cash flows, in an event of default both unsecured and secured

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
Credit Rating Agencies and Credit Ratings

355

debtholders have access to unpledged assets, while only secured debtholders
have access to specific pledged assets as an additional repayment source.
3. Which of the following factors are associated with a lower probability of
default and higher credit quality for a corporate issuer?
A. Higher profitability, higher coverage, and higher leverage
B. Higher profitability, lower coverage, and lower leverage
C. Higher profitability, higher coverage, and lower leverage
Solution:
C is correct. Higher profitability, higher coverage, and lower leverage are
associated with a lower probability of default and higher credit quality for a
corporate issuer.
4. A bond investor analyzing Broadvue CorporationвҖҷs unsecured debt estimates a POD of 2% and an LGD of 80%. Using this information to approximate the annual credit spread and observing an actual credit spread of 200
bps per year, which of the following statements is correct?
A. An investor would be fairly compensated for assuming BroadvueвҖҷs
credit risk.
B. An investor would be less than fairly compensated for assuming
BroadvueвҖҷs credit risk.
C. An investor would be more than fairly compensated for assuming
BroadvueвҖҷs credit risk.
Solution:
C is correct. Since POD Г— LGD = 1.60% and the credit spread is 2.00%,
Credit Spread > POD Г— LGD and the investor would expect to be more than
fairly compensated for assuming BroadvueвҖҷs credit risk.

CREDIT RATING AGENCIES AND CREDIT RATINGS
describe the uses of ratings from credit rating agencies and their
limitations
The three major credit rating agenciesвҖ”MoodyвҖҷs Investors Service (вҖңMoodyвҖҷsвҖқ),
Standard & PoorвҖҷs (вҖңS&PвҖқ), and Fitch Ratings (вҖңFitchвҖқ)вҖ”play a central role in the
credit markets. The rating agencies independently assess issuer credit risk on a
forward-looking basis using quantitative and qualitative analysis. For most outstanding
corporate and sovereign bonds, at least two of the agencies provide credit ratings, a
symbol-based measure of the potential risk of default of a particular bond or issuer
of debt.
Many bond investors use credit ratings to provide direct and easy comparability of
the relative creditworthiness of all bond issuers, within and across industries and bond
types, although there is some debate about ratings comparability across the types of
bonds. Changes in credit ratings provide a broad overview of changing credit market
conditions. In individual bond or issuer cases, they may trigger covenants, changes to
debt pricing for step-up bonds, or other contractual clauses. Credit migration risk,
or downgrade risk, is the risk that a bond issuerвҖҷs creditworthiness deteriorates, or

3

356

Learning Module 14

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.

Credit Risk

migrates to a lower rating, leading investors to believe the risk of default is higher.
Credit ratings are also widely used to satisfy regulatory, statutory, and contractual
requirements.
Ratings are issued on behalf of the issuer. To issue a rating, the rating agencies often
meet with the issuer and in some cases receive access to material non-public information, such as financial projections unavailable to public investors. Rating agencies
monitor the ongoing performance of debt issuers once a rating is issued, adjusting
ratings higher as credit risk decreases or lower if a default is deemed more likely. In
addition, credit agencies may issue a positive or negative outlook as creditworthiness
improves or deteriorates but a rating change is not yet warranted.
A rating agencyвҖҷs forward-looking analysis may overlook or underestimate key
financial risks. For example, rating agencies were widely criticized for contributing to
the Global Financial Crisis of 2008вҖ“2009 given what came to be seen as overly optimistic ratings on subprime mortgage-backed securities following the sharp decline
in housing prices. This led to regulatory attempts to reduce the dominant role of the
major credit rating agencies. As a result of these new rules, regulations, and legislation, credit rating agencies have become more transparent and reduced their conflicts
of interest. Additional credit rating agencies have emerged both globally and locally.
Some credit rating agencies are well-established in their home markets but are less
well-known globally, such as Dominion Bond Rating Service (DBRS) in Canada and
Japan Credit Rating Agency (JCR) in Japan. The market dominance of the largest
credit rating agencies and the prevalence of the вҖңissuer payвҖқ model, however, remain
largely intact and unchallenged.

Credit Ratings
The three major global credit rating agencies use similar, symbol-based ratings that
assess a bond issueвҖҷs risk of default and the potential loss the investor may suffer.
Exhibit 7 compares their long-term rating scale ranked from highest to lowest. These
are ratings for bonds with a maturity exceeding one year. Ratings on short-term debt
follow a similar logic but are not shown here.

Exhibit 7: Long-Term Rating Matrix: Investment Grade vs. Non-Investment Grade

Investment Grade

High-Quality Grade

Upper-Medium Grade

Low-Medium Grade

MoodyвҖҷs

S&P

Fitch

Rating Grade Description

Aaa

AAA

AAA

Highest credit quality, lowest level of
credit risk

Aa1

AA+

AA+

Very high credit quality with very low
level of credit risk

Aa2

AA

AA

Aa3

AAвҖ“

AAвҖ“

A1

A+

A+

A2

A

A

A3

AвҖ“

AвҖ“

Baa1

BBB+

BBB+

Baa2

BBB

BBB

Baa3

BBBвҖ“

BBBвҖ“

High credit quality with low level of
credit risk
Good credit quality with moderate
level of credit risk

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
Credit Rating Agencies and Credit Ratings

Non-Investment
Grade
(вҖңJunkвҖқ or вҖңHigh
YieldвҖқ)

Low Grade or
Speculative Grade

Default

357

MoodyвҖҷs

S&P

Fitch

Rating Grade Description

Ba1

BB+

BB+

Speculative with substantial credit risk

Ba2

BB

BB

Ba3

BBвҖ“

BBвҖ“

B1

B+

B+

B2

B

B

B3

BвҖ“

BвҖ“

Caa1

CCC+
CCC

Highly speculative with high credit
risk

Substantial credit risk with default as a
real possibility

Caa2

CCC

Caa3

CCCвҖ“

Ca

CC

CC

Very high levels of credit risk with
default either occurring or about to
occur

Ca

C

C

Default or default-like process has
begun

C

D

D

In default (entered bankruptcy filings,
administration, receivership, liquidation, or other formal winding-up
procedure) with little prospect for
recovery of principal or interest

Aaa or AAA rated bonds are triple-A and are вҖңof the highest quality, subject to the
lowest level of credit risk.вҖқ Bonds rated Baa3/BBBвҖ“ or higher are called вҖңinvestment
grade.вҖқ Bonds rated Ba1 or lower by MoodyвҖҷs and BB+ or lower by S&P and Fitch,
respectively, are considered speculative credit and increasingly higher default risk. These
types of bonds are also referenced as: вҖңlow grade,вҖқ вҖңspeculative grade,вҖқ вҖңnon-investment
grade,вҖқ вҖңbelow investment grade,вҖқ вҖңhigh yield,вҖқ and more colloquially to specifically
emphasize their inherent riskiness, вҖңjunk bonds.вҖқ The D rating is reserved for securities that are already in default in S&PвҖҷs and FitchвҖҷs scales. For MoodyвҖҷs, bonds rated C
are likely, but not necessarily, in default. Issuers of bonds rated investment grade are
generally more consistently able to issue debt and can borrow at lower interest rates
than those rated below investment grade.
In comparison to high-yield bonds, investment-grade bonds have a lower risk
profile, are less negatively affected by adverse economic and market conditions, and
are more appropriate for institutional portfolios that face quality restrictions.

Credit Rating Considerations
While credit rating agencies perform a useful market function by classifying bonds
based upon relative credit risk, market participants usually conduct their own analysis
rather than exclusively relying on ratings when choosing investments. Sole reliance
on credit ratings in making investment decisions includes pitfalls, such as the potential for rating agency decisions to lag market pricing of credit risk, overlook relevant
financial risks, or involve miscalculations or unforeseen changes not fully captured
in a rating agencyвҖҷs forward-looking analysis. It is important for investors to perform
their own research and draw their own conclusions regarding the credit risk of a given
debt issue or issuer, particularly for investors in high-yield bonds or bonds that face
a potential downgrade.

358

Learning Module 14

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.

Credit Risk

Credit ratings tend to be sticky and lag market pricing of credit risk.
в– 

Bond prices and credit spreads often move faster than rating agencies
change their ratings (or ratings outlook) in response to changes in perceived
creditworthiness. Credit spreads change daily, whereas bond ratings, appropriately, change less frequently. Even over long time periods, however, credit
ratings may lag changes in bond prices. Moreover, particularly for certain
speculative-grade credits, two bonds with similar ratings may trade at very
different credit spreads. This may result from the fact that credit ratings
seek primarily to assess the expected loss, whereas for distressed debt, pricing is focused more on default timing and expected recovery rates.

в– 

While ratings outlooks suggesting a possible future upgrade or downgrade
are more closely aligned with market conditions, bond investors who wait
for rating changes before making buy and sell decisions may underperform
other investors who make portfolio decisions in advance of rating agency
changes.

Some risks are difficult to capture in credit ratings.
в– 

Examples include litigation risk, environmental risk, and natural disasters.
Leveraged transactions, such as debt-financed acquisitions (i.e., changes
in the capital structure through large stock buybacks), are often difficult
to anticipate and thus to capture in credit ratings. Rating agencies may
view complex risks very differently, resulting in divergent or split ratings
between the agencies. For example, when WeWork Inc., a US-based real
estate private start-up company with an asset light business model and negative cash flow, issued unsecured debt for the first time in 2018, it was rated
BBвҖ“ by Fitch, B+ by S&P, and Caa1 by MoodyвҖҷs.

Ratings may involve miscalculations or unforeseen changes not fully captured in
a rating agencyвҖҷs forward-looking analysis.
в– 

As mentioned earlier, credit rating agency analyses failed to anticipate
the sharp decline in housing prices that led to the default of highly rated
subprime mortgage bonds during the Global Financial Crisis of 2008вҖ“2009.
Historical examples of complex accounting fraud that supported high issuer
credit ratings for companies that subsequently defaulted, include Enron and
WorldCom in the United States and Wirecard AG in Germany.

Example 3 highlights these considerations using the example of Wirecard AG.
EXAMPLE 3

Wirecard AG Ratings and Bond Prices
Wirecard AG is a German payments firm that issued unsecured debt in 2019 and
was subsequently declared insolvent in June 2020 due to complex accounting
fraud described in detail later in the curriculum. The price of WirecardвҖҷs bonds
from issuance until insolvency is shown below:

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
Credit Rating Agencies and Credit Ratings

вҖӢ

Wirecard 0.5% Coupon 2024 Maturity Bond Price (% of Par)
вҖӢ

Source: Bloomberg.

MoodyвҖҷs initiated its coverage of Wirecard AG by issuing a Baa3 long-term
issuer rating in August 2019. The companyвҖҷs debut public bond offering of
EUR500 million in five-year senior unsecured debt with a fixed annual coupon
of 0.5% was priced just below par in early September 2019.
On 15 October 2019, WirecardвҖҷs bond price fell below 85% of par following a
Financial Times report alleging fraud and false accounting practices at the company. While Wirecard denied the claims and subsequently hired an independent
auditor, doubts remained among debt and equity investors. Despite changes at
the companyвҖҷs supervisory board and reports of a strategic investment from
Japanese investment firm Softbank, the release of a critical independent audit in
April 2020, delays in reporting audited financial results, and other irregularities
contributed to ongoing investor concerns.
With Wirecard AGвҖҷs bonds trading at a price near 80, MoodyвҖҷs placed the
company on review for downgrade on 2 June 2020, citing these concerns but
retaining an IG issuer rating. Two weeks later, Wirecard AG bond prices plunged
to 40 as claims of fraud and missing cash balances were confirmed in mid-June.
On 19 June 2020, MoodyвҖҷs downgraded the issuer to a sub-investment-grade
B3 rating with a negative outlook and withdrew its credit rating altogether
three days later, citing insufficient information to support the maintenance of
a rating. The company filed for insolvency on 25 June 2020, and its bond price
fell to below 20% of par value.
Investors who bought and held Wirecard AG bonds until 19 June 2020 solely on
the basis of its IG credit rating suffered a substantial loss. The Wirecard example
highlights the challenges faced by credit rating agencies in evaluating expected loss
and adjusting credit ratings given a rapidly evolving series of events.

359

360

Learning Module 14

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.

Credit Risk

QUESTION SET
1. Which of the following choices properly ranks ratings from the
three major credit rating agencies from the lowest to highest credit risk?
A. B1, Ba2, Baa3
B. BBB+, Ba3, BвҖ“
C. Baa1, BB, Baa3
Solution:
B is correct.
2. Determine the correct answers to fill in the blanks: In comparison to highyield bonds, investment-grade bonds have a __________ risk profile and are
__________ negatively affected by adverse economic and market conditions.
Solution:

In comparison to high-yield bonds, investment-grade bonds have a lower
risk profile and are less negatively affected by adverse economic and market
conditions.
3. Which of the following statements most accurately characterizes best practices for the use of credit ratings among analysts?
A. Analysts can generally rely on credit ratings and ratings outlooks to
predict the market price of credit risk.
B. Analysts must incorporate credit ratings into their analysis to meet
regulatory requirements.
C. Analysts should conduct their own credit analysis, as sole reliance on
credit ratings to make investment decisions has several pitfalls.
Solution:
C is correct. A is incorrect since credit ratings tend to lag rather than predict the market price of credit risk.
4. Which of the following statements best describes the relationship between
credit ratings and market pricing of credit risk?
A. Credit ratings primarily seek to assess expected loss, while market
pricing of credit risk for investment-grade bonds is primarily focused
on default timing and expected recovery rates.
B. Credit rating outlooks tend to be more closely aligned with market
conditions than credit ratings.
C. Credit ratings usually capture the market pricing of credit risk associated with debt-financed acquisitions.
Solution:
The correct answer is B. A is incorrect, as while credit ratings primarily seek
to assess expected loss, the market pricing of credit risk for distressed bonds
is primarily focused on default timing and expected recovery rates.

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
Factors Impacting Yield Spreads

FACTORS IMPACTING YIELD SPREADS
describe macroeconomic, market, and issuer-specific factors that
influence the level and volatility of yield spreads
Corporate bonds and other вҖңcredit-riskyвҖқ debt instruments typically trade at a yield
premium, or spread, to bonds that have been considered вҖңdefault-risk free,вҖқ such as
US Treasury bonds or German government bonds. Credit spreads, expressed in basis
points, widen based on issuer-specific factors, such as a decline in creditworthiness,
sometimes referred to as credit migration or downgrade risk, or market-based factors,
such as a greater risk aversion during periods of financial distress. Credit spread risk
is the risk of greater expected loss due to changes in credit conditions as a result of
macroeconomic, market, and/or issuer-related factors.

Macroeconomic Factors
Changing macroeconomic conditions and changes in the credit cycle often go in lockstep: As the business cycle improves, credit spreads narrow and investors are willing
to assume more credit risk. A deteriorating credit cycle will cause credit spreads to
widen. Spreads are narrowest at or near the top of the credit cycle, when market participants perceive credit risk to be at its lowest; they are widest at or near the bottom
of the credit cycle, when financial markets believe credit risk has reached its peak.
Beyond the higher coupons typically offered by high-yield bonds to compensate for
their greater risk, reasons for investing in HY bonds include the following:
в– 

Portfolio diversification вҖ“ HY bonds often have lower correlation with IG
bonds and default risk-free interest rates. Their inclusion in a fixed-income
portfolio may therefore increase diversification and risk-adjusted return.

в– 

Capital appreciation вҖ“ Economic recovery, or improved issuer-specific
performance, often has a more sizeable positive impact on HY than IG bond
prices. In addition to improved cash flow, other issuer-specific events that
may drive capital appreciation include rating upgrades, mergers or acquisitions, or favorable management changes.

в– 

Equity-like return with lower volatility вҖ“ While HY bond and equity prices
tend to fluctuate in a similar way over the economic cycle, HY bond returns
typically exhibit more stability given their larger income component versus
stocks. Some empirical studies suggest that HY bonds offer a more attractive riskвҖ“return profile than equities over the long term. They may also be
preferable for yield-seeking investors with a limited ability to assume equity
volatility.

Credit ratings estimate expected loss by considering not only the POD but also
the LGD, establishing a clear relationship between credit ratings and bond yields. The
relationship between credit ratings and composite bond yields of different ratings and
maturities are shown in Exhibit 8.

361

4

362

Learning Module 14

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.

Credit Risk

Exhibit 8: U.S. Composite Bond Yields by Rating and Tenor

Source: Bloomberg as of 23 September 2022.

Exhibit 8 shows three important relationships. First, the higher the credit rating,
the lower the yield for a given maturity. Investors require less compensation for the
risk of higher rated bonds with lower default risk. Second, in general, the longer the
maturity, the higher the yield, as default risk tends to rise for longer maturities. Third,
the yield spread difference between IG bond ratings is generally narrower than the
difference between IG and HY.
Over the cycle, HY bond spreads are more susceptible to widening under adverse
market conditions when investors tend to sell riskier assets and buy default risk-free
assets, known as a вҖңflight to quality.вҖқ In addition, HY bonds may face liquidity risk,
which also widens bidвҖ“offer spreads in times of financial stress. The benefits and
considerations of adding HY bonds to a portfolio are addressed in Example 4.
EXAMPLE 4

Benefits and Considerations of High-Yield Bond
Investments
A pension fund manager made the economic forecasts for the following year:
вҖӢ

Last Year
(Actual)

This Year
(Forecast)

Economic growth

2.5%

3.2%

Long-term interest rate

1.5%

2.0%

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
Factors Impacting Yield Spreads

Last Year
(Actual)

This Year
(Forecast)

High-yield default rate

3.3%

2.1%
(Historical low)

Financial market volatility

16.5%

20.0%

вҖӢ

Despite improving economic and market conditions, financial market volatility is expected to increase.
1. Describe the benefits and considerations of adding high-yield bonds to the
investment portfolio under this scenario.
Solution:

Benefits: Investing in high-yield bonds should improve the risk-adjusted
return of the overall portfolio in an expected environment of:
в– 

accelerating economic growth,

в– 

rising interest rates, and

в– 

falling HY default risk to a historical low.

Considerations: The additional market risk arising from higher expected
market volatility may temper the diversification benefit. In times of heightened volatility, HY bonds may also be exposed to market liquidity risk when
cash is needed from the portfolio (for example, to meet regular pension
payments).
Exhibit 9 presents a stylized view of these credit spread curve level and shape
changes for investment-grade (IG) and high-yield (HY) issuers over the economic
cycle moving clockwise across the four scenarios shown. The spread change in spread
for IG bonds is narrower than that for HY bonds. HY bonds are more sensitive to
changing macroeconomic and credit conditions.

363

364

Learning Module 14

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.

Credit Risk

Exhibit 9: Credit Spread Curves over the Economic Cycle
Early expansion

Late expansion

Spread

Spread
HY

HY

IG

IG

Tenor

Tenor

Contraction

Peak
Spread

Spread

HY

HY

IG

IG

Tenor

Tenor

There may be other systematic reasons why spreads change. Corporate bonds trade
primarily over the counter using brokerвҖ“dealers who must commit their own capital
for market-making purposes. Tighter financial regulations increase the cost of holding
capital for trading in credit-risky bonds, particularly for large global banks that are
the most dominant market participants. Funding stresses also naturally translate into
wider credit spreads. The availability of funding is related to overall macroeconomic
and credit cycle conditions but may also be driven by market sentiment, such as the
willingness to take on risk. Additionally, in periods of heavy new issue supply, credit
spreads will widen if there is insufficient demand. In periods of high demand for
bonds, spreads will move tighter.

Market Factors
For the most liquid bonds with the lowest default risk, such as developed market
sovereign debt, the yield for a given maturity is a combination of real interest rates
plus an expected inflation rate premium. The yield spread on corporate bonds includes
an additional risk premium that compensates investors for credit and liquidity risks
as well as the potential tax impact of investing in a specific bond. Changes in any of
these components will alter the yield, price, and return on the bond. The total yield
spread over the government benchmark bond captures these risk components.
Market liquidity risk refers to the transaction costs associated with selling a bond.
This is the risk that the price at which investors can actually transact may differ from
the price indicated in the market through bidвҖ“ask spreads. The ability and willingness
of brokerвҖ“dealers to make markets, as reflected in the bidвҖ“ask spread, is an important
determinant of market liquidity and associated risks to transact in the market.
Two main issuer-specific factors affect market liquidity risk. First, issuer size, or
more specifically the aggregate value of publicly traded debt an issuer has outstanding,
is an important liquidity factor. Second, the issuerвҖҷs credit quality is critical. In general,
the less debt an issuer has outstanding and the less frequently its debt trades, the

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
Factors Impacting Yield Spreads

higher the market liquidity risk and the bidвҖ“ask spread. The lower the credit quality
of an issuer, the higher the market liquidity risk. To compensate investors for the risk
that there may not be sufficient market liquidity for them to buy or sell bonds in the
quantity they desire, the spread or yield premium on corporate bonds includes both
a market liquidity and a credit risk component.
Typically, a bond that trades more frequently and with higher volume provides
investors more opportunity to purchase or sell the security and thus has less liquidity
risk. The difference between the bid (or purchase) and the offer (or sale) price depends
on the type of bond, the size of the transaction, and the time of execution, among other
factors. For instance, the most liquid government bonds often trade at a fraction of
a basis point between the purchase and sale prices, while less liquid corporate bonds
can have a much wider difference between the bid and offer prices.
During times of financial stress or crisis, market liquidity can decline sharply,
causing bond prices to fall and yield spreads on corporate and other spread-based
debt to widen significantly. In most crises, not only does credit deterioration result in
wider bidвҖ“ask spreads, but it also may cause spillover effects from one fixed-income
market segment to others. For example, risk aversion among HY bond investors may
lead to significant spread widening among lower rated IG bonds as well.

Issuer-Specific Factors
Beyond macroeconomic and market factors, the expected financial performance of
individual issuers has a significant effect on both the level and volatility of yields and
yield spreads.
In particular, factors common to all issuers include debt coverage and leverage.
Debt coverage refers to the sufficiency of a borrowerвҖҷs resources or cash flows to make
necessary interest and principal payments, while leverage measures a borrowerвҖҷs relative
reliance on debt versus other sources of financing. The source of repayment and use
of proceeds differ among issuer types. Corporate issuers typically invest in long-term
assets and repay debt from operating cash flow, while sovereign borrowers conduct
fiscal policy and provide public goods while collecting tax revenue as a primary source
of repayment. These factors are evaluated in detail for sovereign and non-sovereign
government as well as corporate issuers in later lessons.
Investors often evaluate the yield and yield spread of a specific issuerвҖҷs bond using
a comparison to bonds within the same credit rating category, within the same sector
due to similar performance drivers, or to companies with a similar business model or
other common features. Example 5 illustrates the use of such a comparison to allow
an investor to distinguish between macroeconomic and issuer-specific factors.
EXAMPLE 5

WeWork Yields versus B-Rated Corporates
WeWork is a US-based real estate company that leases commercial properties
to provide co-working spaces for firms and individuals. The company enjoyed
a meteoric rise during its first several years of existence as a rapidly expanding
office space lessee financed by private equity capital. Despite its asset light
business model and negative cash flow, WeWork issued debt in April 2018, a
privately placed USD700 million seven-year senior unsecured bond with a fixed
coupon of 7.875% priced at par and rated Caa1 by MoodyвҖҷs, B+ by S&P, and
BBвҖ“ by Fitch. The following diagram shows the relationship between the average
five-year yield of corporate bonds with high credit risk with a similar maturity
and WeWorkвҖҷs bond yield following the issuance.

365

366

Learning Module 14

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.

Credit Risk

вҖӢ

WeWork 7.875% 2025 Bond Yield versus Five-Year B Corporate
Yield
вҖӢ

Source: Bloomberg, Normalized Yields with April 2018 = 100.

We see that B-rated corporate bond yields fluctuated between 75% and 150%
of their April 2018 levels over the period, but WeWorkвҖҷs bond yield exhibited
far greater volatility, reaching a yield nearly five times that of April 2018 in
early 2020. While a detailed analysis is beyond the scope of this example, three
noteworthy issuer-specific events may be used to explain the relative yield
relationship over the period:
WeWorkвҖҷs Failed IPO (September 2019): The failure of WeWorkвҖҷs widely anticipated IPO was caused by weak governance and inflated growth and earnings
expectations, which resulted in a company valuation of USD50 billion. As the
failure increased WeWorkвҖҷs relative reliance on existing debt versus anticipated
new equity, its bond yield nearly doubled, while average B-rated corporate bond
yields fell in a favorable macroeconomic environment through 2019.
COVID-19 Pandemic (March 2020): Economic shutdowns and work-fromhome policies had a disproportionately negative effect on WeWorkвҖҷs co-working
business model and expected cash flows as compared to other HY issuers. The
companyвҖҷs bonds traded at distressed prices as low as 35% of par value and were
downgraded to CCC+ (negative outlook) by S&P, the only credit rating agency
that had retained a B rating for WeWork to date.
Recovery and WeWorkвҖҷs IPO (October 2021): The decline in WeWorkвҖҷs bond
yields was disproportionately large in 2021 as compared to B-rated corporate
yields as the economy reopened and employees returned to work. This improved
outlook allowed the company to revisit its plans to issue equity at a more realistic valuation. News of a possible second IPO attempt in mid-2021 caused
WeWork bond yields to decline. Its bonds traded at a premium when the IPO
was completed via a combination with special purpose acquisition company

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
Factors Impacting Yield Spreads

(SPAC) BowX, which valued WeWork at USD9 billion and raised USD1.3 billion
in cash. WeWorkвҖҷs reduced reliance on debt and improved cash flow caused its
bond yields to trade close to those of B-rated bonds, despite its lower rating.
This simplified WeWork example ignores duration differences and compares bonds
across sectors within a ratings category rather than within the commercial real estate
sector or among comparable asset light, negative cash companies, such as Uber. Later
fixed-income lessons will introduce greater detail in comparing issuer-specific, macroeconomic, and market factors.

The Price Impact of Spread Changes
In an earlier module, we explained how bond duration and convexity are used to
approximate a bondвҖҷs price change given a change in yield-to-maturity. We now address
the source of the yield-to-maturity change. Since the yield-to-maturity on a corporate
bond consists of a government benchmark yield and a spread, a change in the bondвҖҷs
yield-to-maturity can originate in either component or a combination of the two. The
key point is that for an option-free fixed-rate bond, the same duration and convexity
statistics that apply for a change in benchmark yield also apply for a change in spread.
Importantly, the modified duration and convexity measures give an approximate
change in the full price of a bond for a change in yield-to-maturity, regardless of the
source of the change. However, changes in the yield-to-maturity components do not
occur in isolation. In practice, the analyst is concerned with the interaction between
benchmark yield and spread changes, between changes in expected inflation and the
expected real rate, and between changes in credit and liquidity risk. For example, a
вҖңflight to qualityвҖқ described earlier can cause government benchmark yields to fall
as credit spreads widen and liquidity declines for bonds of low credit-quality issuers.
Example 6 shows the risk/return components of a bond via a hypothetical spread
decomposition.
EXAMPLE 6

Decomposition of a Romanian Eurobond Yield
In 2019, the Government of Romania issued its first-ever 4.625% 30-year
Eurobond, which was priced at a spread of 411.4 bps over the 1.25% Federal
Republic of Germany bond maturing 15 August 2048. The initial yield spread
indicated the combined credit and liquidity risk of the bond. The 4.625% Romania
bond subsequently traded in a wide price range, reflecting the prevailing market
assessment of its credit risk and yield spread as well as the benchmark German
yield, as shown in the chart below:

367

368

Learning Module 14

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.

Credit Risk

Source: Bloomberg.

Suppose that two years after issuance, the bond was traded at 122.25/125.75
(bid/offer). This meant that a buyer would have to pay the offer price of 125.75
for the bond and a seller would receive the bid price of 122.25.
Bond mid-market price = (122.25 + 125.75)/2 = 124.00.
With 28 years remaining to maturity, the Romanian bond yield based on its
mid-market price is equivalent to 3.2988%:
	вҖӢ124.00 = вҖӢвҲ‘

28 _
4.625
100
_
вҖӢвҖӢ
вҖӢ
n вҖӢ+ вҖӢ
n=1 (вҖӢ 1 + r)вҖӢ вҖӢ вҖӢ(1 + r)вҖӢ28вҖӢ

	вҖӢr вүҲ 3.2988%вҖӢ.
Assume we observe a Federal Republic of Germany benchmark bund yield
of 0.2350% on the same day. The current spread of the Romania bond may be
shown as:
= 3.2988% вҲ’ 0.2350%
= 3.0638% or 306.38 bps.
To further break down this spread, we can compute the liquidity spread
using the bid/offer prices. At the offer price, the yield is equivalent to 3.2396%:
	вҖӢ125.25 = вҖӢвҲ‘

28 _
4.625
100
_
вҖӢвҖӢ
вҖӢ
n вҖӢ+ вҖӢ
n=1 вҖӢ(1 + r)вҖӢ вҖӢ вҖӢ(1 + r)вҖӢ28вҖӢ

	вҖӢr вүҲ 3.2396%вҖӢ.
At the bid price, the yield is equivalent to 3.3588%:
	вҖӢ122.75 = вҖӢвҲ‘

28 _
4.625
100
_
вҖӢвҖӢ
вҖӢ
n вҖӢ+ вҖӢ
n=1 вҖӢ(1 + r)вҖӢ вҖӢ вҖӢ(1 + r)вҖӢ28вҖӢ

	вҖӢr вүҲ 3.3588%вҖӢ.
Therefore: Liquidity spread = 3.3588% вҲ’ 3.2396% = 0.1192% or 11.92 bps.
Credit spread = 306.38 bps вҲ’ 11.92 bps = 294.46 bps.
These вҖңbuilding blocksвҖқ of the Romania bond yield are summarized below:

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
Factors Impacting Yield Spreads

Liquidity spread: 11.92bp
Yield spread:
306.38bps
Credit spread: 294.46bp

Bond yield: 3.2988%
Benchmark Yield:
23.50bps

While IG debt investors are less likely to be impacted by default, they are more
focused on spread riskвҖ”that is, the effect on prices and returns from changes in
spreads. The price impact from spread changes is driven by two main factors: (1) the
modified duration of the bond and (2) the magnitude of the spread change. The effect
on return to the bondholder depends on the holding period used to calculate the return.
In the case of a small, instantaneous change in yield spread, the price impact can
be approximated, as shown in Equation 3, by
%вҲҶPVFull = вҲ’AnnModDur Г— вҲҶSpread,

(3)

where AnnModDur is the annualized modified duration and PVFull is the bondвҖҷs

full price. Note that lower (higher) spreads have a positive (negative) impact on bond
prices and thus returns.
For larger spread changes, the effect of convexity needs to be incorporated into
the approximation, as seen in Equation 4:
%вҲҶPVFull = вҲ’(AnnModDur Г— вҲҶSpread) + ВҪAnnConvexity Г— (вҲҶSpread)2,

(4)

where AnnConvexity is annualized convexity. Care is required to ensure convexity is properly scaled to be consistent with how the spread change is expressed. For
option-free bonds, convexity should be scaled so it has the same order of magnitude
as duration squared and the spread change is expressed as a decimal. For example, if a
bond has duration of 5.0 and reported convexity of 0.235, then first re-scale convexity
to 23.5, and then apply the formula. For a 1% increase in spread, the result would be
%вҲҶPVFull = (вҲ’5.0 Г— 0.01) + ВҪ Г— 23.5 Г— (0.01)2 = вҲ’0.048825 or вҲ’4.8825%.

The price impact of instantaneous spread changes is illustrated in Exhibit 10 using
the two semiannual coupon BRWA bonds with a price of par highlighted in the preceding lessons:

Exhibit 10: Price Impact of Instantaneous Spread Changes
Tenor and
Coupon

Settlement

Maturity

Modified
Duration

Convexity

5-year, 3.20%

15 October 2025

15 October 2030

4.58676

24.23895

10-year, 6.20%

15 October 2025

15 October 2035

7.29085

68.74440

From the initial spread, in increments of 50 bps and for both wider and narrower
spreads, the new price and actual return for each spread change are calculated.
Moreover, the estimated returns without and then with the convexity term are presented. As shown, the approximation using only duration is reasonably accurate for
small spread changes, but for larger changes, the convexity term generally provides
a meaningful improvement, as in Exhibit 11.

369

370

Learning Module 14

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.

Credit Risk

Exhibit 11: Price Impact of Duration & Convexity for Given Spread Change
5-Year BRWA Bond
Spread (bps)

Scenarios
вҲ’100

вҲ’50

0

50

100

Spread over 5-year UST (bps)

0

50

100

150

200

Bond yield

2.20%

2.70%

Actual bond price

104.71

102.32

3.20%

3.70%

4.20%

100.00

97.73

95.53

Actual return

4.71%

2.32%

вҖ”

вҲ’2.26%

вҲ’4.46%

Approx. return: duration only

4.58%

2.29%

вҖ”

вҲ’2.29%

вҲ’4.59%

Approx. return: duration &
convexity

4.70%

2.32%

вҖ”

вҲ’2.26%

вҲ’4.46%

10-Year BRWA Bond

Scenarios

Spread (bps)

вҲ’100

вҲ’50

0

50

100

Spread over 10-Year UST (bps)

100

150

200

250

300

Bond yield
Actual bond price

5.20%
107.72

5.70%
103.77

6.20%
100.00

6.70%

7.20%

96.39

92.95

Actual return

7.72%

3.77%

вҖ”

вҲ’3.60%

вҲ’7.04%

Approx return: duration only

7.29%

3.64%

вҖ”

вҲ’3.64%

вҲ’7.29%

Approx return: duration &
convexity

7.63%

3.73%

вҖ”

вҲ’3.55%

вҲ’6.94%

(Note: Assume 5-year UST: 2.20%, 10-year UST: 4.20% on the bond settlement date.)

Note the price change for a given spread change is higher for the longer-duration bond
than for the shorter-duration bond. As with yield changes, longer-duration corporate
bonds have вҖңhigher spread sensitivity,вҖқ meaning their prices, and returns, are more
volatile with respect to spread changes.
Additionally, investors must be compensated for greater uncertainty about an
issuerвҖҷs future creditworthiness in longer-dated bonds. An investor might be confident in assessing issuer default risk in the near term; however, investor uncertainty
grows over time due to factors that are increasingly difficult to forecast (e.g., poor
management strategy or execution, technological obsolescence, natural or man-made
disasters, corporate leveraging events).
Example 7 shows the impact on price of a bond due to changes in credit quality
or liquidity. Here we apply the methodology from an earlier lesson to approximate
modified duration and convexity. We estimated the modified duration by increasing and
decreasing the yield-to-maturity by the same amount (О”Yield) to calculate corresponding bond prices PV+ and PV_ for a given initial price (PV0), as shown in Equation 5:
вҖӢ(P вҖӢVвҖӢ вҖӢ)вҖӢвҲ’ вҖӢ(P вҖӢVвҖӢ вҖӢ)вҖӢ

_______________
вҲ’
+
	вҖӢAnnualized ModDur вүҲ 2вҖӢвҖҜвҖҜ
вҖҜвҖҜ
вҖӢ.
Г— вҖӢ(О”Yield)вҖӢГ— вҖӢ(P вҖӢV0вҖӢ вҖӢ)вҖӢ

(5)

This approximate annualized modified duration (or ApproxModDur) includes the
frequency of coupon payments and the periodicity of the yield-to-maturity in the
bond price calculations. Recall that approximate annualized convexity (ApproxCon)
uses similar inputs and may be calculated as follows.
вҖӢ(P вҖӢVвҲ’вҖӢ вҖӢ)вҖӢ+ вҖӢ(P вҖӢV+вҖӢ вҖӢ)вҖӢ вҲ’ вҖӢ[2 Г— вҖӢ(P вҖӢV0вҖӢ вҖӢ)вҖӢ]вҖӢ
	вҖӢApproxCon = ____________________
вҖӢвҖҜвҖҜ
вҖҜвҖҜвҖӢ.
(вҖӢ О”Yield)вҖӢ2вҖӢ Г— вҖӢ(P вҖӢVвҖӢ0вҖӢ)вҖӢ

(6)

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
Factors Impacting Yield Spreads

EXAMPLE 7

Bond Price Sensitivity to Spread Changes
Show the price impact on the 4.625% 30-year Romania Eurobond versus a new
shorter-term Romania bond (details below) if the spread changes due to changes
in credit quality and/or liquidity. Show estimated price and return changes (using
modified duration and convexity), approximate modified duration and convexity
versus actual price changes and returns (using the Excel PRICE function), and
discuss the results.
On 13 July 2021, Romania issued another EUR2 billion 1.75% Eurobond:
в– 

Coupon: 1.75% (annual)

в– 

Priced at 99.95% of par

в– 

Yield: 1.756%

в– 

Maturity date: 13 July 2030

в– 

Settlement date: 13 July 2021

в– 

Benchmark 10-year German bund yield: вҖ“0.292%

(Note: ApproxModDur: 8.2600; ApproxCon: 79.2963.)
The modified duration and convexity of this bond are computed using the
approximation shown above. The spread sensitivity to changes in credit quality
and/or bond liquidity on the settlement date are listed in the table below:
вҖӢ

2030 Bond

Scenarios

Spread change (bps) вҖ“100

вҖ“50

0

50

100

Spread (bps)

155

205

255

305

Yield

105
0.7561%

Actual clean price
Actual return

1.2561%

1.7561%

2.2561%

2.7561%

108.617

104.179

99.950

95.919

92.077

8.67%

4.23%

0.00%

вҖ“4.03%

вҖ“7.88%

Estimated price:
ApproxModDur &
ApproxCon

108.602

104.177

99.950

95.921

92.090

Estimated return:
ApproxModDur &
ApproxCon

8.66%

4.23%

0.00%

вҖ“4.03%

вҖ“7.86%

вҖӢ

In contrast, the 4.625% 30-year Eurobond has greater spread sensitivity as
reflected by its higher modified duration and convexity:
в– 

Coupon: 4.625% (annual)

в– 

Traded at 125.13% of par

в– 

Yield: 3.2373%

в– 

Maturity date: 3 April 2049

в– 

Settlement date: 13 July 2021

в– 

Benchmark 30-year German bund yield: 0.206%

(Note: ApproxModDur: 17.2569; ApproxCon: 389.1376.)
вҖӢ

2049 Bond

Scenarios

Spread change (bps) вҖ“100

вҖ“50

0

50

100

Spread (bps)

253

303

353

403

203

371

Learning Module 14

2049 Bond

Credit Risk

Scenarios

Yield

2.2373%

2.7373%

3.2373%

3.7373%

4.2373%

Actual clean price

148.923

136.332

125.130

115.147

106.236

Actual return

19.01%

8.95%

0.00%

вҖ“7.98%

вҖ“15.10%

Estimated price:
ApproxModDur &
ApproxCon

149.158

136.535

125.130

114.942

105.971

Estimated return:
ApproxModDur &
ApproxCon

19.20%

9.11%

0.00%

вҖ“8.14%

вҖ“15.31%

вҖӢ

There are two main observations from the tables above:
a. The estimated price changes and returns using modified duration and
convexity are quite close to actual price changes and returns, especially for the shorter-duration 2030 bond. The longer a bondвҖҷs duration, the greater the discrepancy between estimated and actual price
changes.
b. The 2049 bond is far more sensitive to spread changes than the 2030
bond. The longer the duration, the more sensitive a bondвҖҷs price is to
changes in credit quality and bond liquidity.
25%
20%
15%
Price Change/Actual Return

372

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.

10%
5%
0%

вҖ“100

вҖ“50

0

50

100

вҖ“5%
вҖ“10%
вҖ“15%
вҖ“20%
Spread Change (bps)
2030s

2049s

Taking on more default risk in fixed income offers higher potential return but at
the cost of higher volatility and less certainty of earning that return. The lower the
credit quality, the higher the quoted yield. The realized yield, or return, will almost
always differ because of changes in interest rates, coupon re-investment rates, holding period changes, and the credit-related risks discussed earlier. Additionally, the
volatility of returns will vary by rating. Example 8 shows the impact on bond prices
due to a credit downgrade.
EXAMPLE 8

Changes in BRWA Bond Price Following a Credit
Downgrade
The 3.2% BRWA senior unsecured five-year note was originally offered with
few covenants. Suppose that BRWA is downgraded by one notch by the rating
agencies due to rising technological and environmental risk and BRWAвҖҷs focus

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
Factors Impacting Yield Spreads

on the legacy technology of internal combustion engines. Based on the current
market environment, the differences in credit spread in the same industry due
to the one-notch lower rating, applicable to the 2030 and 2035 bond tenors, are
observed to be 1.0% and 2.2%, respectively.
Assume that when the rating downgrade happens:
вҖӢ

Modified Duration

Convexity

3.20% 2030s

3.82250

20.22640

6.20% 2035s

6.57882

58.43082

вҖӢ

Using Equation 3, the price impact on the 3.20% BRWA 2030 bond can be
estimated as:
%вҲҶPVFull = вҲ’(AnnModDur Г— вҲҶSpread) + ВҪAnnConvexity Г— (вҲҶSpread)2
= вҲ’(3.82250 Г— 0.01) + ВҪ(20.2264) Г— (0.01)2
= вҲ’0.037214 or вҲ’3.7214%.
For the 6.20% BRWA 2035 bond, the price impact is estimated as:
%вҲҶPVFull = вҲ’(6.57882Г—0.022) + ВҪ(58.43082) Г— (0.0220)2
= вҲ’0.130594 or вҲ’13.0594%.
As in the earlier examples, the negative price impact on the longer-duration
bond is expected to be much larger due to credit migration.
QUESTION SET
1. Which of the following statements best describes the relative performance of HY bonds over the economic cycle?
A. HY bonds often have lower correlation with IG bonds and default riskfree interest rates.
B. HY bond and equity prices tend to fluctuate similarly over the economic cycle, but HY bond returns exhibit more stability given their
smaller income component versus stocks.
C. Economic recovery or improved issuer-specific performance often has
a similar positive impact on HY and IG bond prices.
Solution:
A is correct. B is incorrect since HY exhibit more stability due to a higher
income component versus stocks. C is incorrect since economic recovery or
improved issuer-specific performance usually has a greater positive impact
on HY versus IG bond prices.
2. A bond investor observes a bid/offer quote for a 5-year French government
zero-coupon bond of 93.75/93.775. The bondвҖҷs liquidity spread is closest to:
A. 25 bps.
B. 5 bps.
C. 54 bps.
Solution:
C is correct. We first calculate the respective bid and offer yields as follows:

373

374

Learning Module 14

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.

Credit Risk

100
вҖӢ1 + r вҖӢ вҖӢ

Bid yield: вҖӢ93.75 = вҖӢ_
вҖӢ
(
)5
rbid = 1.2937%
100
вҖӢ1 + r вҖӢ вҖӢ

Offer yield: вҖӢ93.75 = _
вҖӢ(
вҖӢ
)5
roffer = 1.2991%
The liquidity spread of 54 bps (0.0054%) is equal to the difference in the bid
yield and the offer yield (= 1.2991% вҲ’ 1.2937%).
3. Determine the correct answers to fill in the blanks: The longer a bond's duration, the __________ the discrepancy between estimated and actual price
changes and the __________ sensitive a bond's price is to changes in credit
quality and bond liquidity.
Solution:

The longer a bond's duration, the greater the discrepancy between estimated and actual price changes and the more sensitive the bond's price is to
changes in credit quality and bond liquidity.
4. For a bond with a modified duration of 4 and a convexity of 0.25, which of
the following changes in credit spread would result in a price decrease closest to 7.5%?
A. 1% decrease
B. 1% increase
C. 2% increase
Solution:
The correct answer is C, as shown by solving for вҲҶSpread in Equation 4:
%вҲҶPVFull = вҲ’(AnnModDur Г— вҲҶSpread) + ВҪAnnConvexity Г— (вҲҶSpread)2
вҲ’ (4 Г— 0.02) + ВҪ(25) Г— (0.02)2 = вҖ“0.075 or вҖ“7.5%.
The spread change is inversely related to the price effect, with a spread increase leading to a fall in bond price. Note that since duration was 4, we had
to rescale the convexity from 0.25 to 25.

Practice Problems

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.

PRACTICE PROBLEMS
1. Determine the correct answers to fill in the blanks:____________ is the risk that a
bond issuerвҖҷs creditworthiness deteriorates, leading investors to believe the risk
of default is __________ and causing the yield spreads on the issuerвҖҷs bonds to
_________ and the price of its bonds to _______.
2. An uncollateralized USD200,000 note has the following characteristics:
Recovery rate 95%
Exposure at default USD150,000
If the noteвҖҷs expected loss in the event of default is USD2,500, its probability of
default is closest to:
A. 15%.
B. 25%.
C. 33%.
3. Determine the correct answers to fill in the blanks: While the likelihood of default
for IG borrowers is typically __________ that of an HY issuer, an investorвҖҷs loss in
the event of a default for secured debt is usually __________ than unsecured debt
due to the secondary source of repayment.
4. A bond investor is considering the credit risk components and observed yield
spreads for two IG bonds of similar maturity and liquidity:

Bond 1

Bond 2

POD

LGD

Yield Spread

1.25%

75%

100 bps

1.1%

85%

95 bps

Which of the following conclusions about the relationship between these bonds
is most correct?
A. An investor should be indifferent between purchasing Bond 1 and Bond 2,
since Bond 1вҖҷs higher spread is sufficient compensation for the higher POD
versus Bond 2.
B. An investor should prefer Bond 2 over Bond 1, since they may earn a spread
that is more than sufficient for assuming the credit risk.
C. An investor should prefer Bond 1 over Bond 2, since it offers the highest
spread relative to the expected loss.
5. Pitfalls of relying solely on credit ratings when making bond investment decisions
may be best described as the following:
A. Rating agencies may change their rating in response to changing market and
credit conditions for a given issuer.
B. Credit agencies may issue a positive or negative outlook for an issuer as
credit risk rises or falls, but a rating change is not yet warranted.
C. Ratings may involve miscalculations or unforeseen changes not fully captured in a rating agencyвҖҷs forward-looking analysis.

375

376

Learning Module 14

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.

Credit Risk

6. An investment-grade bond with modified duration of 7 and reported convexity
of 0.51 increases in price by 9.93% after a yield spread change. The value of the
spread change would be closest to:
A. вҲ’1.5%.
B. 0.15%.
C. 1.5%.

Solutions

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.

SOLUTIONS
1. Credit migration risk (or downgrade risk) is the risk that a bond issuerвҖҷs creditworthiness deteriorates, leading investors to believe the risk of default is higher
and causing the yield spreads on the issuerвҖҷs bonds to widen and the price of its
bonds to fall.
2. The correct answer is C.
Here we may use Equation 1 to solve for POD:
EL = POD Г— (EE вҖ“ Collateral) Г— (1 вҖ“ RR).
Substituting in the values provided:
USD2,500 = POD Г— (USD150,000)Г—(1 вҖ“ 0.95)
POD = USD2,500/(USD150,000 Г—0.05) = 0.33 = 33%.
3. While the likelihood of default for IG borrowers is typically below that of an HY
issuer, an investorвҖҷs loss in the event of a default for secured debt is usually lower
than unsecured debt due to the secondary source of repayment.
4. C is correct. We can compare Bond 1 and Bond 2 by calculating the expected loss
for each and comparing it to the annual spread:
EL = POD Г— LGD
Credit Spread вүҲ POD Г— LGD
Bond 1: EL = 0.938% (= 1.25% Г— 75%)
Spread вҲ’ EL = 6.2 bps (= 1.00% вҲ’ 0.938%).
Bond 2: EL = 0.935% (= 1.1% Г— 85%)
Spread вҲ’ EL = 1.5 bps (=0.95% вҲ’ 0.935%).
An investor should therefore choose Bond 1 given its higher expected return
versus credit risk. A is incorrect as it fails to take the LGD into account. B is
incorrect as although Bond 1 earns a 1.5 bps spread above the expected annual
loss, it is less than the additional 6.2 bps spread above the expected loss earned by
purchasing Bond 1.
5. The correct answer is C. While answers A and B are both true, they are not a
pitfall of sole reliance on credit ratings when making bond investments.
6. The correct answer is A. Equation 4 estimates bond price changes based on duration, convexity, and changes in spread:
%вҲҶPVFull = вҲ’(AnnModDur Г— вҲҶSpread) + ВҪAnnConvexity Г— (вҲҶSpread)2.
With ModDur = 7 and reported convexity 0.51, making the necessary convexity
re-scaling and substituting in values to solve for spread results in
0.0993 = вҲ’(7 x вҲҶSpread) + ВҪ (51) (вҲҶSpread)2
вҲҶSpread =-0.015 = -1.5%.
Lower spreads make the first expression in the equation positive, along with the
equationвҖҷs second convexity-based term. The answer must therefore involve a

377

378

Learning Module 14

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.

Credit Risk

decline in spreads as in answers A and B. However, B is incorrect since it fails to
rescale convexity.

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.

LEARNING MODULE

15

Credit Analysis for Government Issuers
LEARNING OUTCOMES
Mastery

The candidate should be able to:
explain special considerations when evaluating the credit of
sovereign and non-sovereign government debt issuers and issues

INTRODUCTION
This learning module explores special considerations for the credit evaluation of
sovereign and other public issuers that often access fixed-income markets to finance
their activities.
A major difference between corporate and sovereign issuers is the use of proceeds
and source of repayment of debt obligations. In contrast to corporations that fund
working capital and fixed assets to generate profits, sovereign and other government
issuers use debt to conduct fiscal policy, supply public goods and services, and fund
other government expenditures. While companies primarily rely on operating cash
flow to repay debt, governments use tax revenues and other government revenues,
such as tariffs and fees, to pay interest and principal.
We analyze sovereign bonds using a combination of qualitative and quantitative factors to assess their ability and willingness to pay. Sovereign defaults are not uncommon,
particularly as countries transition from emerging to advanced economies. However,
in contrast to corporate issuers, sovereign bondholders are generally unable to force
governments to declare bankruptcy and liquidate assets. Non-sovereign issuers, such
as certain local governments or quasi-government entities, also issue debt to finance
their expenditures or develop infrastructure. This debt is backed by their ability to
levy local taxes or generate specific project revenue.
LEARNING MODULE OVERVIEW
в– 

Governments borrow in public markets to conduct fiscal policy and meet budgetary needs, such as the provision of public
goods.

в– 

A sovereign governmentвҖҷs ability to tax private economic activity
causes these bonds to normally have the lowest credit risk of any
issuer in a specific country. In advanced economies, sovereign debt is
often considered default risk-free.

1

380

Learning Module 15

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
Credit Analysis for Government Issuers

в– 

A combination of qualitative and quantitative factors is used to analyze a sovereign issuerвҖҷs ability and willingness to pay.

в– 

Greater central bank independence from the sovereign issuing entity
reduces the likelihood that a national government will simply increase
the money supply by purchasing domestic debt.

в– 

A key distinction for sovereign creditworthiness is whether its domestic currency is considered to be a reserve currency, that is, one that is
fully convertible and held by foreign central banks and other investors.

в– 

Non-sovereign government debt is issued by local governments or
quasi-government entities, backed by their tax revenue or specific
project revenue.

в– 

The credit analysis of non-sovereign debt backed by tax revenue has
similar considerations to sovereign bonds, while project-based revenue
bonds are typically evaluated based upon the cash flows associated
with the underlying project.

LEARNING MODULE SELF-ASSESSMENT
These initial questions are intended to help you gauge your current level
of understanding of this learning module.
1. Identify the debt type that corresponds to the correct example:
A) sovereign debt, B) non-sovereign debt, C) corporate debt
вҖӢ

1. Issued by an entity backed by cash
flow from its business operations
2. Issued by a countryвҖҷs government,
backed by its ability and willingness
to tax
3. Issued by a local government
or entity, backed by its ability and
willingness to tax, or revenue from a
specific public project
вҖӢ

Solution:
1. C is correct. Corporate debt is issued by non-government corporations
to finance business operations, and payments are made from operating cash
flow.
2. A is correct. Sovereign debt is issued by national governments to conduct
fiscal policy and finance their budgets. This debt is paid based on the governmentвҖҷs ability and willingness to collect taxes from within a jurisdiction.
3. B is correct. Non-sovereign debt is issued by sub-sovereign or local governments and related entities. These bonds are supported by the local taxing
authority of the issuer or specific public project revenue.
2. The principle of sovereign immunity is related to the sovereign
governmentвҖҷs:
A. ability to pay.
B. ability to tax.

Introduction

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.

C. willingness to pay.
Solution:
C is correct. Under the principle of sovereign immunity, national laws
limit investorsвҖҷ ability to force a sovereign government into bankruptcy or
liquidate its assets to settle debt claims as would be the case for a corporate
issuer.
3. The creditworthiness of sovereign and other government borrowers is based
upon qualitative and quantitative factors. Which of the following is not a
quantitative factor?
A. External stability
B. Economic growth and flexibility
C. Fiscal strength
Solution:
B is correct. The quantitative factor is actually economic growth and stability, not flexibility.
4. Which of the following statements best describes characteristics of external
strength associated with higher credit quality?
A. A government that is able to impose and enforce capital controls
B. A government that has established free trade agreements with neighboring countries
C. A government whose central bank issues a reserve currency
Solution:
C is correct. A key distinction for sovereign creditworthiness is whether
its domestic currency is considered to be a reserve currency, fully convertible and frequently held by foreign central banks and other investors. A is
incorrect as capital controls may not support debt capacity. B is incorrect
since free trade is a necessary, but not a sufficient, condition for establishing
external strength.
5. Match the following debt issuances to the correct issuer type:
A) agency bonds, B) general obligation bonds, C) revenue bonds
вҖӢ

1. Bonds issued for building a regional
highway toll road
2. Bonds issued by the national
mortgage finance corporation, under
national law.
3. Bonds issued by a state government
to fund a pension deficit
вҖӢ

Solution:
1. C is correct. Revenue bonds are issued to finance a specific public benefit
project, mostly supported by the local/regional government. The revenue
from the project supported by the economic base for utilization of the project determines its credit worthiness.
2. A is correct. Agencies are quasi-government entities whose primary activities are to fulfill a government-sponsored mission to provide public services
that are often based upon a specific sovereign law or statute. In many cases,

381

382

Learning Module 15

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
Credit Analysis for Government Issuers

either the law or statute creating the entity authorizes it to finance its activities using debt.
3. B is correct. General obligation (GO) bonds are unsecured bonds backed
by the general revenues of the issuing non-sovereign government. These
bonds are supported by the taxing authority of the issuer, rather than the
revenue from a specific project.
6. Which of the following is a relevant qualitative factor for assessing the sovereign rating for a countryвҖҷs debt issue?
A. Natural resources
B. Trading partnership with a strong economy
C. Economic diversification
Solution:
C is correct. One of the key factors for assessing the creditworthiness of a
sovereign issuerвҖҷs debt is the degree of economic diversification, as well as
growth potential. The economies in countries with the highest-rated sovereign borrowers typically have an advanced and highly diversified domestic
economy with strong, sustainable growth prospects. Emerging or frontier
market economies, on the other hand, often depend upon a single industry
or commodity and/or fewer trading partners, causing the tax revenues available to these sovereign borrowers to be more susceptible to an economic
downturn, key commodity price fluctuations, and/or trade interruptions.

2

SOVEREIGN CREDIT ANALYSIS
explain special considerations when evaluating the credit of
sovereign and non-sovereign government debt issuers and issues
As outlined in earlier lessons, both sovereign and non-sovereign governments issue
debt to finance their activities. In contrast to corporate debt, this debt is used to
conduct fiscal policy and meet budgetary needs, such as providing public goods and
services including infrastructure, health care, and education. The primary source of
repayment for sovereign debt is usually taxes and other government revenue, which
can include fees, tariffs, and in some cases the profits of state-owned enterprises. A
sovereign governmentвҖҷs ability to tax all private economic activity under its jurisdiction
is the primary reason why such bonds usually have the lowest credit risk of any issuer
within a specific country. While sovereign bonds in the most advanced economies
are often considered default risk-free, those issued by emerging and frontier market
governments involve greater default risk.
Bond investors evaluate the creditworthiness of both corporate and public issuers
by the stability and predictability of issuer cash flows, the sufficiency of those cash
flows to meet required interest and principal payments, and the issuerвҖҷs relative reliance
on debt financing versus other available resources. The creditworthiness of sovereign
and other government borrowers is based upon qualitative and quantitative factors
unique to the public sector, as shown in the following sections.

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
Sovereign Credit Analysis

Qualitative Factors
Sovereign government policies affecting the macroeconomy and financial markets
include monetary and fiscal policies that typically seek to create an economic environment with positive, stable growth and stable, low inflation. Domestic and foreign
investors evaluate the creditworthiness of a sovereign issuer by considering a governmentвҖҷs taxation and spending policies and the underlying economy as a primary
source of tax revenue for repayment. Qualitative factors included in this assessment
are shown in Exhibit 1.

Exhibit 1: Qualitative Factors in Sovereign Creditworthiness
Government Institutions and Policy

Fiscal Flexibility

Economic Flexibility

Monetary Effectiveness

External Status

Government Institutions & Policy: This factor addresses the role of sovereign government institutions and policies in fostering political and economic stability. From
an economic standpoint, these policies range from basic legal protections, such as
maintaining the rule of law and the enforcement of property rights, to promoting a
culture of debt repayment, transparency, the consistency of financial data reporting,
and the relative ease of doing business within a jurisdiction. Political factors include
stability of domestic political institutions and the absence of conflict with neighboring
countries. These factors are often captured using a relative ranking or scoring approach.
In addition to a sovereign governmentвҖҷs ability to pay, we must also consider its
willingness to pay. Willingness to pay is important for sovereign issuers because of the
principle of sovereign immunity, under which investors face limitations in forcing
a sovereign government to declare bankruptcy or liquidate its assets to settle debt
claims as would be the case for a corporate issuer. Sovereign immunity limits the legal
recourse of bondholders in many instances, preventing external creditors from fully
enforcing debt claims. In most cases, given the involvement of multiple lenders and
multilateral agencies such as the International Monetary Fund (IMF), investors agree
to restructure debt to provide extended terms and/or favorable interest rates for a
specified period to recover their investment, as in the following example.
EXAMPLE 1

UruguayвҖҷs 2003 Sovereign Debt Exchange
After years of economic stagnation compounded by a banking crisis resulting
from large deposit withdrawals first by neighboring Argentines and then by its
own residents, Uruguay was forced to float its currency in June 2002. This caused
a large depreciation of the Uruguayan peso (UYI) which, together with the fiscal
cost of the banking crisis, led to a sharp rise in debt that pushed the country to
the brink of default. With the support of the IMF, in March 2003 the authorities
announced their intention to carry out a market-friendly debt restructuring to

383

384

Learning Module 15

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
Credit Analysis for Government Issuers

moderate short-term liquidity pressures and improve the medium-term servicing profile of foreign currency-denominated sovereign debt. A debt exchange
to extend UruguayвҖҷs bond maturities by five years was successfully agreed to in
May 2003 with the consent of 90% of bondholders. Although the transaction
was voluntary, it was deemed by analysts to be a default in substance given a
lack of sufficient bondholder compensation for the delayed debt payment as well
as the subordination of bondholders who did not participate in the exchange.
Fiscal Flexibility: Sovereign governments are also evaluated on how well they establish and maintain fiscal discipline over time and under different economic conditions.
The management of public finances extends from the enforceability of tax collection
to the prudent allocation of government budget expenditures on public goods to
managing sovereign debt outstanding relative to economic activity. This assessment
is based upon past experience in adjusting spending over economic cycles and the
expected effect of fiscal policy changes, as in the following example.
EXAMPLE 2

Government of RomaniaвҖҷs Improved Ratings Outlook
In October 2021, MoodyвҖҷs Investors Service changed its ratings outlook on the
Government of Romania from negative to stable with a Baa3 issuer and senior
unsecured debt rating. In addition to solid economic growth prospects, MoodyвҖҷs
cited an expectation of consistent and sustained fiscal consolidation as a reason
for the improved outlook. As part of RomaniaвҖҷs goal to become a full-fledged
member state after joining the EU in 2007, the government was expected to
prepare and implement fiscal reforms to reduce its annual deficit to below 3%
of GDP within three years. The incentive to reduce the deficit was strengthened
by the possible suspension of EU structural and investment grants in the case
of non-compliance.
Monetary Effectiveness: Monetary policy involves central bank activity directed
toward influencing the quantity of money and credit in an economy. Central banks
establish short-term interest rates and reserve requirements, and they buy and sell
sovereign bonds using open market operationsвҖ”all to encourage stable and sustainable
growth amid relative price stability. At one extreme, central banks may implement
policy almost completely independent of government interference and influence;
at the other extreme, they may simply act as the agent of the government. Central
bank independence from the public Treasury reduces the likelihood that a sovereign
government will monetize their domestic debt, driving domestic inflation higher and
reducing the external value of the domestic currency.
Economic Flexibility: The economic activity under a sovereign governmentвҖҷs
jurisdiction available to tax and service debt is usually the primary source of debt
repayment. Key factors important in gauging creditworthiness include not only the
size of an economy and level of per capital income, but also the degree of economic
diversification and growth potential.
Economies in countries with the highest-rated sovereign borrowers typically
have an advanced and highly diversified domestic economy with strong, sustainable
growth prospects. Emerging or frontier market economies, on the other hand, often
depend upon a single industry or commodity or have fewer trading partners, causing
the tax revenues available to these sovereign borrowers to be more susceptible to an
economic downturn, key commodity price fluctuations, and/or trade interruptions.
In many cases, such countries have a sizable informal economy or face challenges in
collecting tax revenue.

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
Sovereign Credit Analysis

External Status: External status or governance refers to how a sovereign governmentвҖҷs international trade, capital, and foreign exchange policies influence its
ability to support and service outstanding debt. Monetary policy credibility and the
exchange rate regime have a significant effect on international capital flows. A key
distinction for the creditworthiness of a sovereign government is whether its domestic
currency is considered to be a reserve currency, that is, one that is fully convertible
and frequently held by foreign central banks and other investors as a portion of their
foreign exchange reserves. When foreign investors are able and willing to hold assets
in a countryвҖҷs currency in the form of cash, sovereign bonds, and other investments,
it greatly expands the governmentвҖҷs ability to access foreign investors using domestic
currency debt. This greater flexibility minimizes the likelihood of sovereign default
and increases a governmentвҖҷs ability to sustain structural budget deficits and a higher
level of debt.
In contrast, many emerging and frontier market countries have exchange rate
restrictions, capital controls, and/or a lack of full convertibility that constrains their
ability to borrow from foreign entities by issuing bonds in foreign currencies. In cases
where such debt markets are unavailable, these countries are more likely to access
foreign currency funding from supranational organizations, such as the IMF, in order
to meet development needs or implement economic reforms.
While a countryвҖҷs internal and external strength are usually determined by its
economic growth dynamics, competitiveness, and diversification, geopolitical risk is
also often a factor to consider, as in the following example.
EXAMPLE 3

MoldovaвҖҷs IMF Credit Facility
RussiaвҖҷs military invasion of Ukraine in February 2022 caused a deterioration
in the creditworthiness of several East European countries due to heightened
political and economic risk. Given its proximity to the conflict and the influx
of far more refugees on a per capita basis than its neighbors, the Republic of
Moldova faced the greatest adverse economic impact. Rising inflation, stagnant
growth, and a higher current account deficit due to falling exports and rising
energy prices led Moldovan authorities to request and receive permission from
the IMF to partially draw down an extended credit facility to meet immediate
external obligations, such as energy purchases, in May 2022. The Moldovan government received IMF approval for the temporary funding by both submitting
a budget to meet immediate fiscal needs due to the crisis and reinforcing its
commitment to pursue structural economic reforms in order to avert a default.
The combinations of qualitative institutional (including fiscal and monetary policy), economic, and external factors used to evaluate sovereign creditworthiness are
shown in detail in Exhibit 2.

385

386

Learning Module 15

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
Credit Analysis for Government Issuers

Exhibit 2: Detailed Qualitative Factors in Sovereign Creditworthiness
Government Institutions and Policy
Stable, Predictable Executive,
Legislative and Judicial
Institutions and Policies/
Willingness to Pay/Rule of Law

Fiscal Flexibility

Monetary Effectiveness

Ability to Adjust Revenue and
Expenditures/Fiscal Discipline/
Prudent Use of Debt

Policy Credibility/Exchange Rate
Regime/Financial System and
Debt Market Development

Economic Flexibility

External Status

Economic Diversification/
Competitiveness/
Adaptability to Shocks

Global Currency Status/
Access to External Funding/
Geopolitical Risk

In practice, many of these qualitative factors are interrelated; for example, a weak legal
system often goes hand in hand with a limited ability to collect taxes due or enforce
debt contracts. The use of these qualitative factors in assessing creditworthiness is
best understood using an example, such as the following country comparison.
EXAMPLE 4

Moldova and Romania
Three decades after emerging from central planning to a market economy,
Romania and Moldova share linguistic, cultural, and historical ties as well as a
common border, but they have different sovereign credit risk profiles. Romania
is an investment-grade sovereign issuer (rated Baa3 by MoodyвҖҷs, and BBBвҖ“ by
S&P and Fitch), while Moldova is a non-investment-grade issuer (rated B3 by
MoodyвҖҷs, and BвҖ“ by S&P and Fitch) based in part upon the following factors:
Government Institutions & Policy: While both Romania and Moldova
established representative democracies following one-party rule under
socialism, Romania signed an Association Agreement with the EU in
1992 and formally joined in 2007, codifying its access to European markets and economic integration. MoldovaвҖҷs political transition was slower,
and its government is still considered by many analysts to be an unstable
democracy, with weak governance and institutions and widespread corruption. Moldova faces economic and political hurdles in joining the EU,
including an unresolved conflict within the Transnistria region as well as
internal resistance to EU membership. It did not formally apply to join
the EU until 2022.
Given its aspiration to join the euro currency area, RomaniaвҖҷs fiscal and
monetary policy is focused on meeting strict EU convergence criteria, including limiting fiscal deficits and government debt outstanding,
stabilizing exchange rates, and managing inflation and long-term interest rates. Romania has a financial and banking system with an active,
but small, domestic currency government and corporate bond market.
MoldovaвҖҷs financial system is less well developed, and it faces near-term
fiscal and monetary challenges compounded by the Ukraine conflict as
outlined above. MoldovaвҖҷs domestic currency government debt issuance

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
Sovereign Credit Analysis

is concentrated in short-term maturities, and its ability to borrow is
limited, while domestic inflation is well above the central bankвҖҷs target
despite its monetary tightening measures.
Economy: Romania has a much larger, more diversified, and competitive
industrial economy due to the influx of foreign direct investment from
EU countries since its transition to a market economy as well as abundant
natural resources. Moldova in contrast was slower to privatize its economy following socialism, facing a limited ability to attract capital over the
transition period with a high degree of dependence on Russia for energy
imports. The domestic economy remains dependent upon agriculture and
food processing (which comprise 40% of GDP).
External Status: While both countries increased access to foreign currency bond markets after emerging from socialism, Moldova rescheduled
its foreign currency debt in 2002 to avoid default and remains dependent upon IMF credit facilities as outlined earlier. In contrast, Romania
has maintained access to international capital markets, issuing foreign
currency (EUR and USD) bonds both before and after the 2022 invasion
of Ukraine. As Moldova is more dependent on regional trading partners,
has less well diversified exports and fewer trading partners, it has faced
greater trade disruption due to the war in Ukraine.

Quantitative Factors
Quantitative credit analysis seeks to estimate the likelihood that an issuer can meet
its fixed debt obligations. Unlike corporations that issue periodic financial statements
based upon generally accepted accounting principles, sovereign credit analysts must
rely on government economic data, which varies in terms of quality and timing, lacks
comparability across countries and over time, and faces periodic revision as well as
political considerations. As a result, detailed public sector financial balance sheets
tend to be of limited use in forecasting creditworthiness, with analysts focusing on a
top-down, macroeconomic approach based upon the quantitative factors shown in
Exhibit 3.

Exhibit 3: Quantitative Factors in Sovereign Creditworthiness
Fiscal Strength

Economic Growth and Stability

Debt Burden
Debt Affordability

Economic Growth
Cyclicality
Size and Income Level
External Stability
Balance of Payments
External Debt Burden
Currency Reserves

387

388

Learning Module 15

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
Credit Analysis for Government Issuers

Financial ratios allow the comparison across sovereign issuers and over time in a
similar way as for corporate issuers. While the relevant numerator for such ratios is
often debt size or the level of periodic fixed payments as for corporate issuers, the
denominator is not total sales or total assets but often either government revenue
or domestic GDP as the primary measure of economic activity subject to taxation.
Fiscal Strength: Measuring a sovereign issuerвҖҷs relative fiscal strength depends upon
both its current and expected future debt burden, as well as the relative reliance on
debt versus other financial resources. Some of the key financial ratios that measure
sovereign fiscal strength are shown in Exhibit 4.

Exhibit 4: Key Financial Ratios to Measure Fiscal Strength
Fiscal Strength
Debt Burden

Debt Affordability

Debt to GDP:

Interest to GDP:

General Government Debt

Government Interest Payments

GDP

GDP

Debt to Revenue:

Interest to Revenue:

General Government Debt

Government Interest Payments

Revenue

Revenue

Debt burden measures are similar to leverage and provide an indication of a governmentвҖҷs solvency. In each case, a higher debt burden ratio is associated with lower credit
quality. In addition, annual fiscal surpluses or deficits as a percentage of GDP are often
used to measure fiscal discipline and to determine whether a countryвҖҷs debt burden is
improving or deteriorating over time. Debt affordability, on the other hand, provides
a measure of debt coverage, with a higher ratio also a sign of lower credit quality.
EXAMPLE 5

Fiscal Deficits and Debt-to-GDP in the Eurozone Crisis
The European debt crisis of 2010 arose as several European Union member states
(including Greece, Portugal, Ireland, Spain, and Cyprus) were no longer able
to meet their financial obligations without the assistance of other EU member
states, the European Central Bank, and/or the International Monetary Fund. The
situation stemmed largely from the aftermath of the Global Financial Crisis of
2008вҖ“09, as governments provided financial assistance to failing domestic banks
while their domestic economies stalled and tax revenue fell. As members of the
euro currency zone under the direction of the European Central Bank, these
countries were prevented from using monetary policy tools, such as devaluing the
domestic currency, in response to the crisis. As shown in the following figures,
relatively high pre-existing debt-to-GDP ratios coupled with rising fiscal deficits
caused sovereign credit spreads among these countries relative to Germany, the
largest and most creditworthy member of the EU, to widen dramatically. Later,

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
Sovereign Credit Analysis

some of these EU members adopted austerity measures to improve their fiscal
governance and obtain support from stronger EU member states, which resulted
in tighter sovereign credit spreads over time.
10y Yield Spreads Over German Bonds
35
30
25
20
15
10
5
0
2007

2008

2009

Italy

2010

2011

Greece

2012

2013

Ireland

Portugal

2014

Spain

Debt-to-GDP Ratio (%)
200
180
160
140
120
100
80
60
40
20
0

2007

2008
Italy

2009
Greece

2010

2011

Portugal

2012
Ireland

2013
Spain

2014

2015
Germany

Source: Bloomberg.

The ratios in Exhibit 4 are used by rating agencies to gauge a countryвҖҷs relative
debt burden and debt affordability in a similar manner to corporate financial ratios.
Exhibit 5 shows how these fiscal strength metrics align to MoodyвҖҷs sovereign ratings,
for example. In the case of MoodyвҖҷs and other rating agencies, these and other financial
metrics are not considered in isolation but rather are weighted and combined with
other factors in a comprehensive credit analysis.

389

390

Learning Module 15

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
Credit Analysis for Government Issuers

Exhibit 5: Debt Burden and Debt Affordability
Government
Debt/Revenue

Government Interest
Payments/GDP
600%
500%
400%
300%
200%
100%
0

Ca

30%

Caa

25%

B
Ba
Baa
A

Caa

20%

B

15%

Ba
Baa
A

10%
5%

Aa

Ca

Aaa

Aa

0

Aaa

Economic Growth and Stability: As larger, wealthier economies are better positioned
to achieve sustainable growth and withstand economic and political shocks, the
economyвҖҷs size as measured by GDP as well as its per capita income are important
factors in gauging a countryвҖҷs economic prospects. Historical and projected future real
economic growth levels as well as their variability are also key quantitative measures,
which are summarized in Exhibit 6.

Exhibit 6: Key Financial Measures of Economic Growth and Stability
Economic Growth and Stability
Growth and Volatility

Size and Scale

Average Real GDP Growth:

Size of Economy:

Real GDPtвҖ“1 вҖ“ Real GDPt

GDP in PPP terms

Real GDPt

Real GDP Growth Volatility:
Standard Deviation (Real GDP)

Per Capita GDP:
GDP
Population

EXAMPLE 6

Sovereign Credit Risk of Southeast Asian Economies
A junior analyst is conducting a comparative credit analysis of several upper-medium to non-investment-grade Southeast Asian sovereign issuers (Malaysia,
Thailand, Indonesia, Vietnam, and the Philippines) in the aftermath of the
COVID-19 pandemic. As a first step, she compares the relative size of these five
economies based on GDP as well as per capita GDP:

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
Sovereign Credit Analysis

Real GDP(PPP)
USD trillion 4.00

Southeast Asia, Real GDP and Real Per Capita GDP (PPP), 2021

GDP per capita
$35 USD thousands

3.50

$30

3.00

$25

2.50

$20

2.00
$15

1.50

$10

1.00

$5

0.50
0.00

Malaysia

Thailand

Indonesia
GDP per capita

Phillippines

Vietnam

$вҖ“

GDP(PPP)

Source: World Bank (data.worldbank.org).

While Indonesia is the largest economy in Southeast Asia in terms of GDP
on a purchasing power parity (PPP) basis, Malaysia has the smallest economy
but by far the highest per capita GDP. Despite its size relative to its neighbors,
the Malaysian economy is a relatively high-growth, competitive export-based
economy focused on high technology products, such as electronics and health
care. MalaysiaвҖҷs growth, competitiveness, and stability are among the economic
factors that have earned it the highest credit rating among the five countries
(A3 from MoodyвҖҷs and A from S&P).
GDP growth rates over the past decade and volatility are key indicators of
relative trends among economies, as shown in the following comparison over
the past decade:
Real Per Capita GDP Growth, 2012вҖ“21
8%
6%
4%
2%
0%
вҖ“2%
вҖ“4%
вҖ“6%
вҖ“8%
вҖ“10%
вҖ“12%
Malaysia

Thailand

Indonesia

Vietnam

Phillippines

Source: World Bank (data.worldbank.org).

While Vietnam is among the smallest of the five economies with the second-lowest per capita GDP, it enjoyed the highest growth rate over the decade
and was the only Southeast Asian economy that grew in 2020. The following
summarizes average GDP growth and volatility (as measured by standard deviation of annual GDP changes):

391

392

Learning Module 15

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
Credit Analysis for Government Issuers

Avg GDP
Growth p.a.
5%

Real Per Capital GDP Growth and Volatility
2012вҖ“21
Vietnam

4%
Philippines

Indonesia
3%

Malaysia
Thailand

2%
1%
0%
0%

1%

2%

3%

4%

5%
Standard Deviation
of GDP Growth

Despite being the lowest rated of the five countries (rated Ba3 by MoodyвҖҷs
and BB+ by Standard & PoorвҖҷs), VietnamвҖҷs stable and high growth relative to its
neighbors contributed to a positive outlook from MoodyвҖҷs and ratings upgrades
from BBвҖ“ to BB+ over the past decade from S&P.
External Stability: A countryвҖҷs external stability depends critically upon whether
foreign investors are able and willing to hold assets in a countryвҖҷs currency. Countries
with actively traded currencies where foreign entities are significant investors in
domestic currency assets or those whose domestic currency is held in reserve by
other countries tend to exhibit greater external stability.
Key factors influencing whether a sovereign government with a non-reserve currency can meet external debt obligations include its external liquidity and solvency,
that is, the short- and long-term ability to generate sufficient, stable foreign currency
cash inflows that may be used to meet interest and principal payments on external
debt as well as other obligations to foreign investors.

Exhibit 7: Key Financial Ratios to Measure External Stability
External Stability
Currency Reserves

External Debt

FX Reserves to GDP:

External Debt Burden:

FX Reserves

LT External Debt

GDP

GDP

Reserve Ratio:

External Debt Due:

FX Reserves

External Debt Due in 12m

External Debt

GDP

Quantitative measures of external stability focus on the relative size of external debt as
compared to available sources of repayment. These sources include broad measures,
such as GDP, as well as foreign currency balances (i.e., reserves), or foreign currency
cash flows, often measured as currency account receipts. Current account deficits
and surpluses based on the international trade of goods and services offset changes

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
Sovereign Credit Analysis

in a countryвҖҷs capital account through capital inflows or outflows from abroad. Many
countries with FX reserves accumulate such balances through a current account
surplus with developed countries, while others benefit from foreign currency remittances from citizens working abroad. Declining or volatile foreign currency balances
or cash flows reduce a sovereign borrowerвҖҷs ability to service foreign currency debt.
While quantitative ratios provide a basis for comparison, it is important to consider
a number of factors, as outlined in the following example.
EXAMPLE 7

FX Reserves of Southeast Asian Economies
вҖӢ

Country

Reserve Ratio

FX Reserves to GDP

Malaysia

54%

11.9%

102%

16.4%

31%

3.9%

84%

9.9%

96%

10.3%

Thailand

Indonesia
Vietnam

Philippines
вҖӢ

Source: Bloomberg, FYE 2020.

A cursory comparison of ratios based upon currency reserves among the five
Southeast Asian countries shown above suggests that Thailand should have the
highest external creditworthiness among the five countries. In fact, MalaysiaвҖҷs
greater economic competitiveness and lower reliance on foreign currency-denominated debt actually results in higher external creditworthiness as measured
by rating agencies (with a MoodyвҖҷs external long-term foreign currency rating
of A3 versus Baa1 for Thailand). Despite ThailandвҖҷs higher FX reserves to GDP,
its foreign currency credit rating is the same as that for the Philippines. This
is due in large part to the far greater proportion of Philippine workers abroad
sending foreign currency to the country, which in 2020 comprised nearly 10%
of GDP in the Philippines versus less than 2% in Thailand.
In the case of emerging and frontier market countries where commodity exports
generate the bulk of foreign currency reserves, commodity demand and prices can
be primary factors driving sovereign creditworthiness. While countries facing strong,
stable commodity demand, such as oil-producing nations, often accumulate substantial
reserves and establish sovereign wealth funds to increase economic diversification,
adverse commodity price fluctuations can contribute to sovereign default, as in the
following case.
EXAMPLE 8

ZambiaвҖҷs Default in 2020
The Republic of Zambia defaulted on a USD42.5 million Eurobond payment in
November 2020, the first sovereign default following the COVID-19 pandemic.
Zambia is AfricaвҖҷs second-largest producer of copper, which comprises 60% of
its exports. An economic slowdown due to COVID-19 accelerated a decline in
copper prices beginning in 2014. By November 2020, ZambiaвҖҷs annual inflation
rate climbed to 17.4%, its highest level in four years. Additionally, the national
currency, the kwacha (ZMK), depreciated 33% against the US dollar in 2020,
creating more pain for Zambian consumers. ZambiaвҖҷs total external debt had
more than doubled in just five years, increasing from USD4.8 billion, or 18% of

393

394

Learning Module 15

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
Credit Analysis for Government Issuers

gross domestic product, at the end of 2014 to USD11.2 billion, or 48% of GDP,
in 2019. At the same time, external reserves fell from over 50% of external debt
to just 5% due to falling prices for its copper exports. This led to the inevitable
default on external debt and the consequent restructuring.
QUESTION SET
1. Which of the following statements best describes debt burden versus debt affordability measures?
A. Debt burden measures are similar to leverage, indicating a governmentвҖҷs relative solvency, while debt affordability measures provide a
measure of debt coverage.
B. A higher interest-to-GDP measure is associated with higher credit
quality, while a lower debt-to-GDP ratio signals less credit risk.
C. Higher debt to revenue is associated with greater credit risk, while a
higher interest-to-revenue ratio signals higher credit quality.
Solution: A is correct. B is incorrect, since a higher interest-to-GDP measure is associated with lower credit quality, while a lower debt-to-GDP ratio
signals less credit risk. C is incorrect, as higher debt to revenue is associated with greater credit risk, while a higher interest-to-revenue ratio signals
lower credit quality.
2. Determine the correct answers to fill in the blanks: A key distinction
for the creditworthiness of a sovereign government is whether its domestic
currency is considered to be a __________ currency, that is, one that is fully
convertible and held by foreign central banks and other investors. When
foreign investors are able and willing to hold assets in a countryвҖҷs currency,
it greatly ___________ the governmentвҖҷs ability to access foreign investors
using domestic currency debt.
Solution:

A key distinction for the creditworthiness of a sovereign government is
whether its domestic currency is considered to be a reserve currency, that
is, one that is fully convertible and held by foreign central banks and other
investors. When foreign investors are able and willing to hold assets in a
countryвҖҷs currency, it greatly expands the governmentвҖҷs ability to access
foreign investors using domestic currency debt.
3. Which of the following is a key ratio to measure the fiscal strength of a sovereign government?
A. FX reserves to GDP
B. Government interest payments to GDP
C. GDP to population
Solution:
B is correct. Measuring a sovereign issuerвҖҷs relative fiscal strength depends
upon both its current debt burden as well as the relative reliance on debt
versus other financial resources. Debt burden measures provide an indication of a governmentвҖҷs solvency, one of which is the level of government
interest payments as a percentage of GDP.

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
Non-Sovereign Credit Risk

395

A is incorrect. Although FX reserves to GDP is a key ratio in determining
the creditworthiness of a sovereign government, it is an external stability
ratio, that is, a measure of foreign currency available to service foreign currency debt payments.
C is incorrect. GDP to population is a key ratio in determining the creditworthiness of a sovereign government, but it is related to economic growth
and stability rather than fiscal strength.
4. Match the following indicators to the respective factors in sovereign credit
assessment:
A. Monetary governance
B. Fiscal governance
C. External governance
D. Economic and political governance
вҖӢ

1. Government budget deficit/GDP
2. Long-term external debt/GDP
3. International competitiveness ranking
4. Central Bank policy independent of
public treasury
вҖӢ

Solution:
вҖӢ

1. Government budget deficit/GDP

B. Fiscal governance

2. Long-term external debt/GDP

C. External governance

3. International competitiveness ranking

D. Economic and political governance

4. Central Bank policy independent of
public treasury

A. Monetary governance
вҖӢ

NON-SOVEREIGN CREDIT RISK
explain special considerations when evaluating the credit of
sovereign and non-sovereign government debt issuers and issues

Non-Sovereign Government Debt
While sovereign issuers comprise the largest issuers of government debt, a number
of non-sovereign government issuers, such as government agencies or regional governments, issue debt to finance their activities as well. In the case of government
agencies, investors typically face very similar credit risk to the sovereign given either
implicit government backing in the form of a sovereign law creating the entity and
granting it powers to raise debt, or explicit backing in the form of a guarantee. In the
case of sub-sovereign issuers with their own taxation and income-generating powers,
such as regional government issuers, they benefit from the economic and political

3

396

Learning Module 15

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
Credit Analysis for Government Issuers

governance as well as monetary and fiscal policies of the sovereign as they fall under
its jurisdiction; still, they have a number of features that may cause their creditworthiness to vary significantly from that of the sovereign issuer.
The main types of non-sovereign government issuers include agencies, public
banks, supranationals, and regional governments.

Agencies
Agencies are quasi-government entities whose primary activities are to fulfill a
government-sponsored mission to provide public services, often based upon a specific
sovereign law or statute. In many cases, either the law or statute creating the entity
authorizes it to finance its activities using debt. As quasi-government entities, investors
usually assume a high likelihood of sovereign government support, and rating agencies
typically grant the same rating to these entities as the sovereign entity.
An example of a perpetual bond issued by a government entity is as follows:
EXAMPLE 9

Airport Authority Hong Kong SAR (AAHK) Perpetual
Bonds
AAHK is a statutory body owned by the Hong Kong SAR government responsible for operating and developing Hong Kong International Airport (HKIA), one
of the worldвҖҷs busiest cargo airports and a major passenger hub connecting to
over 200 global destinations. In late 2020, following a sharp decline in passenger
volume during the COVID-19 pandemic, AAHK announced a two-part, USD1.5
billion perpetual bond issuance to fund construction of a third runway and for
general corporate purposes. The issuance was evenly split between bonds with a
2.10% fixed coupon, which AAHK has the right to buy back after 5.5 years, and
those with a 2.40% fixed coupon, which AAHK can repurchase after 7.5 years.
The bonds were rated AA, one notch down from the long-term issuer rating of
AAHK, which was AA+ due to the buyback option. The long-term issuer rating
of AAHK was based on equalization with the Hong Kong SAR government
sovereign rating of AA+. The assumption supporting this rating is the implicit
support for AAHK expected from the Hong Kong SAR government in case of
any financial distress of AAHK.

Government Sector Banks and Development Financing
Institutions
Sovereign governments often sponsor the establishment of specialized financial intermediaries to operate in a specific market or to promote specific sovereign political,
economic, social, or other growth and policy objectives. Similar to agencies, these
institutions are usually created or supported by the sovereign government and enjoy
a similar rating, as in the following example:
EXAMPLE 10

Kreditanstalt fГјr Wiederaufbau (KfW)
Established in 1948 in the Federal Republic of Germany, KfW is the largest
national development bank (80% owned by the German federal government
and 20% by the federal states). It benefits from explicit and direct statutory

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
Non-Sovereign Credit Risk

guarantee and institutional liability by the Federal Republic of Germany. It
is regulated by the вҖңLaw concerning KfW,вҖқ exempt from corporate taxes, and
supervised by the German Federal Ministry of Finance and the German Federal
Financial Supervisory Authority, better known as вҖңBaFin.вҖқ KfW bonds receive
a zero risk weighting under bank capital rules. Its bonds are rated AAA and
вҖңPrimeвҖқ ESG rating. During 2020 its ESG commitment was to originate at least
33% new business in environment and climate protection initiatives and 48%
of new domestic business volume from small and medium-sized enterprises.
To fund this business, KfW has been the most active issuer of Green Bonds in
the international capital markets. It issued its first Green Bond in 2013, and it
raised 20% of its new debt through Green Bonds (EUR16.2 billion in 2021), with
total Green Bond issuance totaling EUR47.1 billion by 2021. The proceeds of
Green Bond issuance are deployed in projects mitigating climate change in the
categories of renewable energies and energy efficiency.

Supranational Issuers
So-called supranational entities are organizations that are established and owned
by sovereign governments that join as members to pursue a common objective.
For example, the World Bank and its affiliates, such as the International Bank for
Reconstruction and Development (IBRD), issue debt to assist developing countries
with projects aimed at combating poverty and pursuing sustainable economic growth.
Examples of supranational entities with a regional focus include the Asian Development
Bank (ADB) and the Development Bank of Latin America (Corporacion Andina de
Fomento, or CAF) in Latin America. Another example of a supranational entity is
provided in Example 11.
EXAMPLE 11

Indonesia Infrastructure Finance (IIF)
The Indonesia Infrastructure Finance (IIF) was established by the Government
of the Republic of Indonesia (30% shareholding) along with World Bank (20%
shareholding), ADB (20% shareholding), and other multilateral institutions,
like KfW (15% shareholding) and Sumitomo Mitsui Banking Corporation (15%
shareholding). IIF was established in January 2010 to help accelerate and improve
private participation in infrastructure development in Indonesia. IIF provides
fund-based products, such as long-term loans, and non-fund-based products,
such as guarantees and other services relating to infrastructure projects. IIF
applies international social and environmental protection standards to ensure
sustainability of infrastructure development in Indonesia. IIFвҖҷs credit rating is
BBB, equivalent to the sovereign rating of the Government of Indonesia, based
on its strategic importance as well as the implicit support and share ownership
of global development institutions.

Regional Government Issuers
These include provincial, state, and local governments, referred to as municipal bonds
in the US and most often as local authority bonds elsewhere, within a specific sovereign
jurisdiction. Local government finance varies widely across countries. In some cases,
such as the Netherlands, the federal government has established a public financial
institution that offers financing to municipalities while establishing a structure that

397

398

Learning Module 15

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
Credit Analysis for Government Issuers

grants them the same credit rating as the federal government. Other countries use
a tax revenue sharing system across sovereign and local governments to ensure that
local authorities are able to meet their obligations. In contrast, in the United States,
municipal issuers, such as state and local governments, are rated individually and
typically issue either general obligation or revenue bonds.
General Obligation Bonds
General obligation (GO) bonds are unsecured bonds that are backed by the general revenues of the issuing non-sovereign government. These bonds are supported
by the taxing authority of the issuer. Revenue bonds are issued for specific project
financingвҖ”for example, financing for a new sewer system, a toll road, bridge, hospital,
or sports arena.
The credit analysis of GO bonds has some similarities to sovereign debt analysis
(e.g., the ability to levy and collect taxes and fees to service debt) but also some differences. The attractiveness of the local business climate, presence of major industries
and employers to establish a diversified, stable corporate tax base, implicit national
government support in some cases, as well as the prudent management of state or
local government budgets all play an important role in establishing the relative creditworthiness of the issuer. That said, non-sovereign governments have limited jurisdictional powers and no control over sovereign economic and monetary institutions,
as is the case for sovereign issuers. Non-sovereign issuers may face greater exposure
to technological change, such as declining industries, and demographic changes, as
in the case of the largest US municipal bankruptcy filing presented in Example 12.
EXAMPLE 12

City of Detroit Bankruptcy Filing
The City of Detroit became the largest US municipal bankruptcy filing in 2013
following a decades-long decline in automotive industry employment and a
shift in manufacturing jobs to lower-wage Southern states. The result was a
demographic shiftвҖ”causing the cityвҖҷs population to decline from 2 million to
700,000вҖ”and increased racial tensions that accelerated a population shift out of
the city to the suburbs. The resulting declines in the property and income tax base
left Detroit with a shortfall in meeting payments on its estimated USD18 billion
in debt outstanding. The city was unable to reach an agreement with lenders,
unions, and pensioners, forcing it to file for Chapter 9 bankruptcy protection.
After a 17-month negotiation period with its creditors, Detroit emerged from
bankruptcy after selling and pledging assets and offering concessions, with
pensioners retaining approximately 85% of their benefits and general obligation
unlimited tax bondholders recovering 74 cents on the dollar for their investments.
Revenue Bonds
Revenue bonds, which are issued to finance a specific project, have a higher degree
of risk than GO bonds because their cash flows are dependent upon a single source of
revenue. The analysis of these bonds is a combination of an analysis of the project and
the finances around the particular project. The project analysis focuses on the need
and projected utilization of the project, as well as on the economic base supporting the
project. This analysis has similarities to that of a corporate bond in that it is focused
on operating results, cash flow, liquidity, capital structure, and the issuerвҖҷs ability to
service and repay its debt based upon cash flow projections. Similar to corporate
debt, a key credit measure for revenue-backed non-sovereign government bonds is
the debt service coverage ratio, a measure of revenue available to cover principal

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
Non-Sovereign Credit Risk

and interest payments after operating expenses. The higher the coverage ratio, the
stronger the creditworthiness. Minimum coverage ratio covenants are a common
feature of revenue bonds. Coverage and other financial ratios are covered in greater
detail in the next learning module on corporate credit risk.
In analyzing these bonds, the inherent riskiness of the cash flows becomes increasingly important. Hence, not only are the underlying capacity and ability to raise revenue
through taxes and fees material, which is important for the sovereign bond evaluation,
but also an understanding of other repayment sources. This becomes particularly
material for various non-sovereign government infrastructure bonds, which may be
issued either by supranational entities or other quasi-governmental issuers, such as
airport authorities or public utility companies (for which the national government
may be a secondary implicit source of repayment in the event of a revenue shortfall).
An example of a non-sovereign government infrastructure project is described below.
EXAMPLE 13

Lima Metro Line 2 Finance Limited
Lima Metro Line 2 Finance Limited (Lima Metro 2) is one of the largest infrastructure debt offerings in Latin America and the largest RPI-CAO-backed
offering to date. RPI-CAOs (RetribuciГіn por InversiГіn вҖ“ Certificado de Avance
de Obras) are a milestone payment, government-sponsored mechanism characteristic of the Peruvian infrastructure financing program.
The RPI-CAO regime is a payment mechanism under which the concessionaire, Metro de Lima LГӯnea 2 S.A., obtains the right to receive systematic payments
as compensation for construction costs incurred for a project. RPI-CAOs are
obtained after construction milestones are achieved and progress reports are
submitted to, and approved by, the Ministry of Transport and Communications
of Peru. These USD-denominated compensation rights are guaranteed by the
Ministry and payable to the concessionaire following a specified installment
schedule. RPI-CAOs are not direct sovereign obligations, but investors have
recourse to the Peruvian government if the Ministry fails to make interest and
principal payments.
The bonds were issued to finance the construction of two routes of the
subway system in the city of Lima, Peru, along with the related electromechanical equipment. The project involved the construction of 35 subway stations
and approximately 35 kilometers of tunnels and courtyards. In April 2014, the
Ministry entered into a concession agreement with Metro de Lima LГӯnea 2
S.A. (a consortium comprised of ACS Iridium, Vialia [FCC], Salini Impregilo,
AnsaldoBreda, Ansaldo STS, and COSAPI, and the project equity sponsors) for
the construction and operation of two underground railway lines.
In June 2015, Lima Metro 2 issued USD1,150MM in 144A/Reg S senior
secured notes at 5.875%. The 19.1-year notes had an average life at issuance of
12.8 years and are rated Baa1 (MoodyвҖҷs); BBB (S&P); and BBB (Fitch). The notes
drew significant interest from asset managers and local Peruvian investors, with
these investor bases comprising the majority of the final order book.
вҖӢ

5.875% Lima Metro Line 2 Finance Limited
Brief Summary of Terms
Issuer:

Issuance Date:

Maturity Date:

Issuance Amount

Lima Metro Line 2 Finance Limited
June 2015
July 2034
USD1,150MM

399

400

Learning Module 15

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
Credit Analysis for Government Issuers

5.875% Lima Metro Line 2 Finance Limited
Brief Summary of Terms
Use of Proceeds

Finance construction of a metro line project in the city of
Lima

Credit Ratings

Baa1 (MoodyвҖҷs); BBB (S&P); BBB (Fitch)

Country

Project Type

Peru
Transportation, Rail

Project Sponsor

A consortium comprised of ACS Iridium, Vialia (FCC),
Salini Impregilo, AnsaldoBreda, Ansaldo STS, and
COSAPI

Source of Payment

RPI-CAO payment regime
вҖӢ

QUESTION SET
1. Which of the following statements best describes the relationship
between local government and sovereign creditworthiness?
A. Local governments have limited jurisdictional powers and no control
over economic and monetary institutions.
B. All sovereign governments use a tax revenue sharing system across
sovereign and local governments to ensure that local authorities are
able to meet their obligations.
C. Local governments with the power to attract and retain major industries and employers are often more creditworthy than their sovereign
government.
Solution:
A is correct. Local governments have limited jurisdiction and no control
over national fiscal and monetary policy. B is incorrect, as some, not all, sovereign governments use tax revenue sharing. C is incorrect. Since local governments are subject to the economic and monetary policy of the sovereign,
their rating is typically equal or below that of the sovereign government.
2. Ile-de-France, the regional government of Paris, issued a green bond, the
proceeds of which are to be used for investments including ecofriendly construction and renovation of buildings, public transport to support sustainable mobility, and renewable energy projects. The bond is backed by the tax
and other revenue of Ile-de-France. This bond is an example of:
A. a general obligation (GO) bond.
B. a revenue bond.
C. an agency bond.
Solution:
A is correct. Though the proceeds of the bond are used for specific green
infrastructure development, interest and principal payments are backed by
the tax and other revenue of the local government rather than any specific
project revenue.
3. Danainfra Nasional Berhad, a special purpose vehicle of the Government of
Malaysia, issued retail bonds for the purpose of financing mass rapid trans-

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
Non-Sovereign Credit Risk

port infrastructure in Kuala Lumpur. Interest and principal payments are
supported by the cash flows of the mass rapid transport system and a credit
guarantee of the Government of Malaysia. This bond is an example of:
A. a general obligation (GO) bond.
B. a revenue bond.
C. an agency bond.
Solution:
B is correct. The funding is for the development of a specific mass rapid
project for Kuala Lumpur, and the repayment is supported by the revenue of
the mass rapid transport line. While the bonds also have a sovereign guarantee to provide credit enhancement, the primary source of repayment is mass
transit revenue.
4. A key credit measure for revenue-backed non-sovereign government bonds
is:
A. the debt service coverage ratio.
B. level of unemployment in the local area.
C. the tax base (depth, breadth, diversification, stability).
Solution:
A is correct. A key credit measure for revenue-backed non-sovereign
government bonds is the debt service coverage ratio, which measures how
much revenue is available to cover debt payments (principal and interest) after operating expenses. This is because the repayment ability for the bond is
directly linked to the revenue of the specific underlying project, rather than
the general tax revenue of the state. Many revenue bonds have a minimum
ratio covenant; the higher the debt service coverage ratio, the stronger the
creditworthiness.

401

402

Learning Module 15

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
Credit Analysis for Government Issuers

PRACTICE PROBLEMS
1. Which of the following statements best characterizes higher creditworthiness for
a non-reserve currency emerging market sovereign government?
A. A country with a government budget surplus, current account surplus with
high economic growth, and a freely floating currency.
B. A country with a government budget deficit, a current account deficit with
moderate economic growth and a fixed exchange rate regime
C. A country with a government budget deficit, a current account deficit, low
economic growth, and a fixed exchange rate regime.
2. Match the indicators below to the impact (positive or negative) on the creditworthiness of a general obligation bond issued by a state government:
в– 

Positive

в– 

Negative

A. Low unemployment
B. Low per capita income
C. Low per capita debt
D. Low tax base
E. High dependence on sales tax
F. High post-retirement obligations

3. Based upon the following data, which country is expected to be assigned the
lowest sovereign credit rating?
Country
Costa Rica

Dominican
Republic

El Salvador

Long-term external debt/GDP (%)

39.6

35.7

57.0

GDP growth (%)

2.06

5.07

2.39

Currency reserves (% of GDP)

13.9

8.1

12.4

Economic Statistics

A. Costa Rica
B. Dominican Republic
C. El Salvador
4. Gulf Investment Corporation (GIC) is an investment company incorporated in
Kuwait as a Gulf Shareholding Company. GIC is equally owned by the governments of the six member states of the Gulf Cooperation Council (GCC). GIC was
formed to foster economic growth, economic diversification, and capital market
development across the GCC region. The credit rating for GIC should be assessed based on its status as a:
A. sovereign agency.

Practice Problems

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.

B. supranational issuer.
C. specialized financial intermediary or public bank.
5. Which of the following statements best characterizes external strength for a
non-reserve currency sovereign country?
A. The ability to impose and enforce strict capital controls
B. The establishment of a fixed exchange rate regime
C. The ability to generate sufficient stable foreign currency cash inflows
6. Agora is an emerging market economy with restricted capital convertibility
(domestic to foreign exchange is not freely convertible). It is significantly dependent on income from the tourism sector and repatriation of income by its
citizens living in foreign countries. It also has a high percentage of external debt
to GDP. Which of the following is the most important factor that may result in an
improvement in its sovereign creditworthiness?
A. Diversification of its foreign currency inflows
B. Reducing foreign currency reserves as a percentage of GDP
C. Devaluation of its exchange rate versus major reserve currencies

403

404

Learning Module 15

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
Credit Analysis for Government Issuers

SOLUTIONS
1. A is correct. This country exhibits fiscal stability as evidenced by its government
budget surplus, high economic growth, and external strength given its current
account surplus and freely floating currency.
2.
A. Low unemployment

Positive

B. Low per capita income

Negative

C. Low per capita debt

Positive

D. Low tax base

Negative

E. High dependence on sales tax

Negative

F. High post-retirement obligations

Negative

A. Positive, as low unemployment indicates a more productive and
income-generating population with potential for higher tax revenue.
B. Negative, as low per capita income reduces the potential for tax collection and
any potential tax raise.
C. Positive, as low per capita debt suggests a higher debt service ratio and greater
capacity for additional debt, if required.
D. Negative, a low tax base limits the potential for tax collection and significantly
weakens the potential for state revenue to meet expenses and service its debt.
E. Negative, as the more diversified the stateвҖҷs revenue stream, the higher its
credit quality. Overreliance on a single revenue stream creates the potential for
volatility in case of any economic disruption.
F. Negative, as high post-retirement obligations indicate further state indebtedness, reducing its ability to service its debt.
3. C is correct. El Salvador is expected to have the lowest credit rating due to its
high long-term external debt-to-GDP ratio. While the Dominican Republic has
lower currency reserves than El Salvador, it also has a lower external debt burden
and higher economic growth.
4. B is correct. GIC is a supranational issuer, as it is sponsored and owned by multiple sovereigns. Its credit rating would be assessed as a supranational based on
weighted sovereign ratings of the sponsoring countries and the nature of their
implicit support in case of financial distress.
5. C is correct. A key factor influencing whether a non-reserve currency sovereign
government can meet external debt obligations is external liquidity and solvency, or the ability to generate sufficient, stable foreign currency cash inflows to
meet interest and principal payments on external debt. A is incorrect, as capital
controls may restrict the ability to generate FX inflows. B is incorrect, as a fixed
exchange rate regime may cause instability in the case of currency devaluation.
6. A is correct. Since Agora has high external debt to GDP and is very dependent
on foreign currency inflows, it should seek to diversify its sources of foreign
currency to avoid financial distress in case of disruption in tourism revenue
or immigrant repatriation. B is incorrect, as maintaining or increasing foreign
currency reserves is important for debt service rather than reducing FX reserves.
C is incorrect. While the devaluation of AgoraвҖҷs exchange rate versus foreign
reserve currencies may make it a more affordable tourist destination, it may also

Solutions

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.

reduce the rationale for income repatriation, leading to lower foreign inflows and
a reduced ability to service external debt.

405

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.

LEARNING MODULE

16

Credit Analysis for Corporate Issuers
LEARNING OUTCOMES
Mastery

The candidate should be able to:
describe the qualitative and quantitative factors used to evaluate a
corporate borrowerвҖҷs creditworthiness
calculate and interpret financial ratios used in credit analysis
describe the seniority rankings of debt, secured versus unsecured
debt and the priority of claims in bankruptcy, and their impact on
credit ratings

INTRODUCTION
In this learning module, we focus on the relative creditworthiness of non-financial
corporate borrowers, building on earlier learning modules on corporate issuers as well
as the earlier fixed-income module on credit risk and its components.
In particular, we assess a companyвҖҷs activities, or its business model, and how this
affects the companyвҖҷs ability to meet its debt obligations. While a companyвҖҷs probability
of default (POD) and loss given default (LGD) are not directly observable, in the first
lesson we consider qualitative and quantitative factors that affect these credit risk
components. Financial statement analysis and cash flow projections are important
tools used to conduct corporate credit analysis. The second lesson applies these tools
to calculate and interpret a variety of financial ratios, including profitability, leverage, and coverage metrics, to assess an issuerвҖҷs probability of default. The seniority
rankings of specific debt issues and use of collateral are of particular importance in
determining credit ratings for a corporate issue and assessing the LGD in an event of
default, which is addressed in the third and final lesson.
LEARNING MODULE OVERVIEW
в– 

The credit risk of a borrower can be evaluated using qualitative
and quantitative criteria that affect a companyвҖҷs likelihood of
default and the investorвҖҷs loss in the event of a default.

в– 

Qualitative factors important in gauging creditworthiness include a
companyвҖҷs business model, its industry, and its competitive position
and business risks, as well as its corporate governance

1

408

Learning Module 16

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
Credit Analysis for Corporate Issuers

в– 

Quantitative factors in measuring creditworthiness involve financial
statement analysis and forecasts, which use profitability, liquidity,
leverage, and coverage measures to gauge a companyвҖҷs ability to meet
its fixed debt obligations.

в– 

Financial ratios are a critical tool used to assess the financial health of
a company, identify trends over time, and compare companies within
and across industries.

в– 

Seniority rankings determine the priority of claims on an issuerвҖҷs
assets and are important determinants of the loss given default for a
specific issue. Rating agencies typically provide both issuer and issue
ratings for corporate credit.

в– 

While an issuer credit rating captures the probability of default or
expected loss of the issuerвҖҷs senior unsecured bonds, an issue rating
refers to specific financial obligations of an issuer and takes such factors as seniority into account.

LEARNING MODULE SELF-ASSESSMENT
1. Which of the following is not a characteristic of higher corporate
creditworthiness?
A. Lower leverage
B. Higher coverage
C. Lower liquidity
Solution:
The correct answer is C. All else held equal, a company with higher liquidity
has a greater ability to meet its short-term obligations, including debt interest and principal.
2. All else being equal, a borrower will have higher capacity to repay its debt in
an industry where the:
A. barriers to entry are higher.
B. threat of substitutes is higher.
C. bargaining power of buyers is higher.
Solution:
The correct answer is A. An industry with higher barriers to entry tend to
have lower threat of new entrants and lower competition. All else being
equal, a borrower in such an industry has higher capacity to support its
debt.
3. Identify the key credit metrics used in credit analysis:
EBIT margin.
Debt/EBITDA.
EBIT/interest expense.

Introduction

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.

вҖӢ

1. Coverage metric
2. Leverage metric
3. Profitability metric
вҖӢ

Solution:
вҖӢ

1. Coverage metric
2. Leverage metric
3. Profitability metric

C. EBIT/interest expense
B. Debt/EBITDA
A. EBIT margin
вҖӢ

4. Companies X, Y, and Z belong to the same industry with the following
financial ratios:
вҖӢ

Company X

Company Y

Company Z

EBITDA margin

15%

18%

18%

Free cash flow (FCF) after dividends/
debt

10%

10%

8%

Debt/EBITDA

1.5

1.5

1.8

Debt/capital

35%

35%

38%

5.6

6.2

6.2

EBITDA/interest
вҖӢ

Based on the following financial ratios only, which company has the lowest
credit risk?
A. Company X
B. Company Y
C. Company Z
Solution:
The correct answer is B. Compared to Company X, Company Y has similar
leverage metrics but better profitability and coverage. Compared to Company Z, Company Y has similar profitability and coverage but better leverage
ratios. Also, when viewing all the metrics, Company Y has either the same
value or better than the other two companies. Therefore, Company Y has
the lowest credit risk among the three companies.
5. Rank the recovery rate of the following bonds in the capital structure of a
company in bankruptcy from the highest to the lowest:
в– 

Junior subordinated debt

в– 

Senior unsecured debt

в– 

Subordinated debt

в– 

Second lien debt

в– 

First lien debt

Solution:
1. First lien debt
2. Second lien debt
3. Senior unsecured debt

409

410

Learning Module 16

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
Credit Analysis for Corporate Issuers

4. Subordinated debt
5. Junior subordinated debt
6. Two senior unsecured bonds of the same issuer of different maturities have
the same:
A. issue credit rating only.
B. issuer credit rating only.
C. issuer and issue credit rating.
Solution:
The correct answer is C. An issuer rating usually applies to its senior unsecured debt and is meant to address an obligorвҖҷs overall creditworthiness.
All senior unsecured bonds are treated as one class and rank pari passu irrespective of maturity. Therefore, both the issuer and the issue credit ratings
are the same.

2

ASSESSING CORPORATE CREDITWORTHINESS
describe the qualitative and quantitative factors used to evaluate a
corporate borrowerвҖҷs creditworthiness
A companyвҖҷs creditworthiness depends primarily on its ability to generate profits and
cash flow sufficient to meet interest and principal payments. Analysts rely on both
qualitative and quantitative factors to evaluate both the likelihood of corporate default
as well as an investorвҖҷs loss in the event of a default. While several different analytical
models measure credit risk, here we focus on broad qualitative and quantitative factors.

Qualitative Factors
Earlier Corporate Issuer learning modules covered many of the key qualitative factors used to gauge a companyвҖҷs ability to satisfy its debt obligations, which include a
companyвҖҷs business model and the industry within which it operates, as well as the
competitive forces and business risks it faces. These factors are summarized in Exhibit 1.

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
Assessing Corporate Creditworthiness

Exhibit 1: Qualitative Factors in Corporate Creditworthiness
Corporate Governance
Appropriate Use of Proceeds/Treatment
of Debtholders/Legal, Tax, Accounting
and Covenant Compliance

Business Model

Industry and Competition

Demand/Revenue/Margin
Stability and Predictability
Asset Quality

Structure/Concentration/
Competitive Forces/Long-Term Growth
and Demand

Business Risk
Deviations from Expected
Demand/Revenue/Margin

Issuer-Specific

Industry-Specific

External

Demand/Revenue/Margin
Stability and Predictability

Cyclicality/Intra-Industry Rivalry/
Life Cycle

Macroeconomy/Technology/
Demographic/Government/
Geopolitics/ESG

Financial analysts evaluating a companyвҖҷs business model, its industry, and its competitive position and business risks from a debtholderвҖҷs perspective must not only consider
whether a firm generates an acceptable return over its cost of capital, but also whether
the timing and size of cash flows are sufficient to adequately cover debt obligations.
Established firms with a business model characterized by stable and predictable cash
flows, low business risk, and less-competitive pressures have a higher capacity to use
debt in their capital structure and a lower likelihood of default than those firms with
lower and less stable cash flows, higher business risk, and/or greater competition. In
contrast to an equity analystвҖҷs valuation of all future cash flows, fixed-income analysts
often focus on how a companyвҖҷs creditworthiness may change over time given the
finite nature of short- and long-term debt claims, as shown in the following example.
EXAMPLE 1

Qualitative Factors Affecting BRWA Creditworthiness
Bright Wheel Automotive (BRWA), a hypothetical auto manufacturing firm
mentioned in an earlier lesson, has a product line based on traditional internal
combustion engine (вҖңICEвҖқ) technology. Having introduced its first electric vehicle
(EV) two years ago, which comprises 5% of current revenue, BRWAвҖҷs management has ambitious plans to convert over half of its models to all-electric over
the coming decade, while adopting hybrid (ICE and electric) technology for its
remaining fleet over the same period. BRWAвҖҷs debt profile as an investment-grade
corporate issuer is as follows:

411

412

Learning Module 16

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
Credit Analysis for Corporate Issuers

Debt
Outstanding/
Availability

0.12% BRWA
150-day
Commercial Paper

Unsecured
364 Day
Facility

3.2% BRWA
Five-Year
Notes

Unsecured
3-year
Revolving
Credit
Facility

3.95% BRWA
Fifteen-Year
Notes

1

2

5

10

30

Years to
Maturity

Qualitative factors, including BRWAвҖҷs business model, industry, and competition and business risk, affect the creditworthiness of its outstanding 150-day
commercial paper, five-year notes and fifteen-year notes.
BRWAвҖҷs planned shift to a mostly EV-based product line over the next decade
mirrors changes announced by other global automobile producers as policymakers seek to reduce vehicle emissions in the wake of climate change. The impact
of BRWAвҖҷs business model, industry, and competitive forces and business risk
on its outstanding debt may be described as follows:
Business Model: BRWAвҖҷs established customer base and acclaimed ICE
vehicle lineup have enabled it to maintain stable revenue growth and
profitability to date, but the companyвҖҷs technology and products must
evolve over time to meet EV market demand. This business model change
results in higher business risk.
Industry and Competitive Environment: BRWA faces growing competition within a fragmented global auto industry, with some competitors
moving faster in establishing EV market share. Competition will intensify
as other traditional ICE producers pursue a similar EV strategy amid
potentially lower barriers to entry for pure EV companies, such as Tesla
and software technology companies.
Business Risk: The execution risk of the EV strategy significantly increases
BRWAвҖҷs business risk. This is because the EV technology platform is not
based on ICE technology, but rather on the integration of batteries, hardware, and software, increasing the bargaining power of BRWAвҖҷs supplier
base.
Consider BRWAвҖҷs debt outstanding as follows:
Commercial Paper: Commercial paper investors face little to no exposure
to BRWAвҖҷs long-term business strategy given the very short tenor of this
debt. Investors will primarily focus on the companyвҖҷs liquidity position
based upon its existing ICE revenue base when assessing credit risk.
Five-Year Notes: Investors in BRWAвҖҷs medium-term bonds face growing
exposure to the greater competitive pressures and business risk associated with BRWAвҖҷs EV strategy, but the company expects to generate most
of its revenue from its traditional ICE customer base when the bond
matures.

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
Assessing Corporate Creditworthiness

Fifteen-Year Notes: Investors in BRWAвҖҷs long-term bonds face the greatest
risk to the companyвҖҷs EV strategy and the associated competitive pressures and elevated business risk, as the company will make later interest
and principal payments from cash flows that depend upon a successful
EV transition.
The BRWA debt issues highlighted in Example 1 are for general, unsecured claims
where company cash flows are the primary source of repayment. Secured debt, on
the other hand, designates specific company assets as collateral as a secondary source
of interest and principal payments. While the quality of a companyвҖҷs assets is an
important factor for both unsecured and secured debt, secured lenders prefer to have
tangible (or hard collateral) rather than intangible (or soft collateral) assets promised
or pledged to secure debt. The value of collateral is most relevant for companies with
lower credit quality and of greatest importance to creditworthiness when a borrowerвҖҷs
POD rises to a level where the collateral is necessary to protect the exposure. Tangible
assets are identifiable physical assets like property, plant and equipment, inventory,
cash, and marketable securities, whereas intangible assets include patents, intellectual property rights, and goodwill. The use of collateral and secured debt can either
reduce the cost of borrowing versus unsecured alternatives or offer corporate issuers
access to debt markets that may otherwise not be available at all, as in the case of the
following example.
EXAMPLE 2

Royal Caribbean Cruise Lines Secured Debt
In the wake of the COVID-19 pandemic, Royal Caribbean Cruises Ltd. (RCL)
suspended its cruise operations in March 2020. Given the uncertainty surrounding the length and severity of the health crisis, RCL took immediate steps to
enhance liquidity, preserve cash, and obtain additional financing.
The first of several RCL financings in that year took place in May 2020,
when the company initiated a private offering of $3.3 billion in senior secured
notes due in 2023 and 2025. The notes were secured by 28 of Royal CaribbeanвҖҷs
fleet of over 60 vessels and also included material intellectual property of the
company. RCL used the proceeds of the bond to repay a $2.35 billion 364-day
senior secured term loan agreement, with the remainder of the bond proceeds
available for general corporate purposes. While the continued suspension of
cruises due to the ongoing pandemic led to subsequent RCL convertible bond
and equity issuances later in the year, the initial issuance of secured debt at
the outset of the COVID-19 crisis represented a cost-effective alternative for
the company to preserve liquidity and financial flexibility in the near term by
pledging its tangible assets as collateral. Despite the increase in RCLвҖҷs POD due
to the pandemic, investors were willing to provide debt financing in part due to
the reduced LGD of the secured notes.
Corporate governance is an important qualitative factor to consider when evaluating corporate creditworthiness. While the assessment of an individual borrowerвҖҷs
character is a common element of consumer credit analysis, it is more difficult in
practice to evaluate managementвҖҷs character and the expected treatment of debtholders for a publicly owned corporation or one that is privately held by investors and
private equity firms. Unlike equity investors with voting rights on important company
matters, debtholders seek to specify the use of debt proceeds as well as any borrower
restrictions at the time of issuance.

413

414

Learning Module 16

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
Credit Analysis for Corporate Issuers

Highly rated issuers of unsecured debt are usually able to raise debt proceeds
for general corporate purposes with few restrictions that usually include affirmative
covenants only, such as compliance with applicable laws and regulations, maintaining
current lines of business, insuring and maintaining company assets, and paying taxes.
Credit analysts must evaluate management signals to make appropriate judgments
about the treatment of debtholders versus shareholders and the potential for dilution.
For high-yield issuers of secured debt, investors usually impose additional restrictions to protect bondholders if an issuerвҖҷs financial condition deteriorates, including
covenants restricting dividends or additional debt as well as financial covenants.
ManagementвҖҷs past track record in the treatment of bondholders is an important
consideration. For example, if management pursued business or financial strategies that resulted in major credit rating downgradesвҖ”such as an overleveraged
debt-financed acquisition, a large debt-financed special dividend to shareholders, or
a major debt-financed stock buyback programвҖ”credit analysts should look closely
at the borrowerвҖҷs character.
As in the case of equity analysts, credit analysts should also evaluate accounting
policies. Aggressive accounting policies mask the performance and the risk of the
underlying business and are potential warning flags to the true character of the business and its leaders. Examples may include the use of significant off-balance-sheet
financing, the preference for capitalizing versus immediately expensing items, and
early and premature revenue recognition. Perhaps the most important red flag is
changing auditors or CFOs frequently. These potential warning flags, as well as any
evidence of fraud or malfeasance, may signal other behaviors or actions that may
adversely impact an issuerвҖҷs creditworthiness. A well-known example of accounting
fraud is provided below in Example 3.
EXAMPLE 3

Wirecard AGвҖҷs Accounting Fraud
Wirecard AG, a German payments firm that processed credit card and online
payments, enjoyed a meteoric rise following its 2005 listing on the Frankfurt
Stock Exchange. It joined the DAX index of the 30 most valuable companies
in Germany and reached a peak market capitalization of over EUR27 billion in
2018 before filing for insolvency in June 2020.
A qualitative analysis of its management strategy and accounting policy in
the years prior to insolvency raises the following red flags about the companyвҖҷs
character:
After Wirecard received a banking license in 2006, it showed a significant
revenue growth and a rapid international expansion through acquiring legitimate
existing businesses, such as CitibankвҖҷs Asia-Pacific credit card processing arm.
WirecardвҖҷs opaque and overly complex business model masked rapidly rising
revenue and profit figures, giving rise to market rumors of suspicious transactions and money laundering.
While the company claimed thousands of small and medium-sized business customers and dozens of partners globally as sources of revenue growth,
just three third-party partner companies provided a large share of WirecardвҖҷs
reported revenue and most of its profits. Additionally, many of the firmвҖҷs assets
were held through external offshore trust accounts.
Wirecard used its bank subsidiary as a lender to fintech partner companies,
as evidenced by the following excerpt from its half-year financial report dated
30 June 2019:

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
Assessing Corporate Creditworthiness

вҖңWirecard does not only provide risk management, technology, and banking services (to its fintech partner companies) but also sometimes provides the
financing based on detailed individual assessments and suitable security measures вҖ“ often in the form of cash securities. This enables the Group, on the one
hand, to increase the added value from its cooperation with FinTech companies
and, on the other, to also significantly increase interest income.вҖқ
The company filed for insolvency in June 2020 when auditors could not
confirm the existence of EUR1.9 billion in cash, which comprised the bulk of
WirecardвҖҷs profits. It was later discovered that WirecardвҖҷs revenue was deposited in escrow accounts held by third-party trustees, rather than paid to the
company itself.
After Wirecard was declared insolvent with debts of EUR3.2 billion, its share
price immediately fell by over 70% and the price of its unsecured bonds fell to 20
cents per EUR. CEO Markus Braun was arrested and later charged with fraud,
breach of trust, and accounting manipulation following a criminal investigation.
It was the biggest accounting fraud and bankruptcy in GermanyвҖҷs post-World
War II corporate history.
Quantitative Factors
Financial statement modeling and forecasting are a quantitative expression of analyst
expectations for a companyвҖҷs future performance. Model inputs are based on an understanding of a companyвҖҷs fundamental business drivers and an assessment of future risks
and opportunities. These inputs are derived using a top-down, macroeconomic or a
bottom-up, issuer-specific approach at the company level. In contrast to equity models,
which seek to value a firmвҖҷs stock based upon all cash flows available to shareholders,
quantitative credit analysis aims to estimate the likelihood that a company can meet
its debt obligations in the future. Exhibit 2 summarizes key quantitative factors used
to measure a corporate issuerвҖҷs credit risk.

Exhibit 2: Quantitative Approaches in Corporate Credit Risk Assessment
Macro (Top Down) Approach

Macroeconomy

Industry

Event Risk

GDP Growth
Cyclicality

Addressable Market
Market Share

Scenario Analysis
External Shocks

Hybrid Approach

Liquidity Leverage
Profitability

Revenue Growth
Operating Profit

Debt Service Coverage
Interest Coverage

Balance Sheet

Income Statement

Cash Flow Statement

Issuer-Specific (Bottom Up) Approach

415

416

Learning Module 16

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
Credit Analysis for Corporate Issuers

Top-down analysis typically begins with a macroeconomic forecast, gauging a companyвҖҷs growth relative to GDP, addressing a firmвҖҷs addressable market and market
share, and assessing the likelihood and impact of possible adverse events that may be
incorporated in a scenario analysis. For example, the economic cycle has a relationship
with the timing and severity of the credit cycle; thus, the credit cycleвҖҷs expected impact
on a specific company or industry is commonly used to gauge credit risk on a macro
level. Bottom-up analysis involves forecasting key revenue drivers and balance sheet
positions, while a hybrid approach might combine expected cyclicality with changing bottom-up features to forecast a companyвҖҷs cash flows. The goal of quantitative
analysis is to identify key factors that drive a corporate issuerвҖҷs POD and how they
change over the credit cycle. These include the following factors:
Profitability: Strong and stable earnings are important in generating the
cash flows that are a primary source of debt repayment. Analysts gauging a
companyвҖҷs ability to make periodic fixed debt payments typically focus on
operating profits and recurring revenues as opposed to non-recurring or
one-time gains. Macro factors, such as an expected economic downturn for
cyclical companies or a declining market share, can adversely impact future
profitability.
Leverage: Financial leverage measures a companyвҖҷs relative reliance on debt
financing in its operations. Measures of leverage typically compare the total
level of debt to a firmвҖҷs resources as gauged by assets, capital, or a measure
of profitability or cash flow. Given the fixed nature of debt claims, debt
investors prefer lower leverageвҖ”that is, more resources per unit of debtвҖ”
while equity investors usually benefit from more debt and higher financial
leverage.
Coverage: Lenders gauge creditworthiness by comparing periodic income
measures or cash flows to debt service (interest and principal), interest, or
debt-like payments, which include leases. Greater coverage means that debt
investors benefit from higher income or cash flows from which fixed debt
obligations can be paid.
Liquidity: Debtholders evaluating near-term debt obligations for issuers with
less stable cash flows often consider the availability of short-term resources
to pay interest or principal. While a firm may be solvent (i.e., have assets in
excess of liabilities and equity), it may nevertheless fail to meet its fixed obligations if it lacks cash or assets that can be readily converted into cash, such
as marketable securities. Measures of liquidity also include committed bank
facilities if a corporate borrower has the contractual right to draw down
cash for the period in question.
The calculation and interpretation of these quantitative factors using financial ratios
is addressed in the next lesson. While investors in senior unsecured investment-grade
debt are almost solely focused on POD, high-yield investors in companies that use
subordination in their debt structure and/or collateral as a secondary source of
repayment also consider historical LGD rates and other factors in assessing credit
risk, which is the subject of the third lesson.
QUESTION SET
1. Match the key quantitative factors:
в– 

Coverage

в– 

Leverage

в– 

Liquidity

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
Financial Ratios in Corporate Credit Analysis

417

вҖӢ

Relative reliance on debt to finance operations
Borrower ability to meet short-term obligations
Comparison of periodic earnings or cash flow to debt service
вҖӢ

Solution:
вҖӢ

Relative reliance on debt to finance operations
Borrower ability to meet short-term obligations
Comparison of periodic earnings or cash flow to debt service

Leverage

Liquidity

Coverage

вҖӢ

2. Determine the correct answers to fill in the blanks: Secured lenders prefer to have _______ assets (or _____ collateral) rather than _______ assets (or
_____ collateral) promised or pledged to secure debt.
Solution:

Secured lenders prefer to have tangible assets (or hard collateral) rather than
intangible assets (or soft collateral) promised or pledged to secure debt.
3. Which of the following statements about shareholders and debtholders is
not true?
A. Both shareholders and debtholders benefit from higher profitability.
B. Shareholders generally benefit from higher leverage, while debtholders
prefer lower leverage.
C. Both shareholders and debtholders benefit from lower coverage.
Solution:
The correct answer is C. Both shareholders and debtholders benefit from
higher coverage, which is the income or cash flow available to pay debt
service.
4. Determine the correct answers to fill in the blanks: Firms with a business
model characterized by stable and predictable cash flows, _____ business
risk, and _____ competitive pressures have a higher capacity to use debt in
their capital structure and a lower likelihood of default.
Solution:

Firms with a business model characterized by stable and predictable cash
flows, low business risk, and less competitive pressures have a higher capacity to use debt in their capital structure and a lower likelihood of default.

FINANCIAL RATIOS IN CORPORATE CREDIT ANALYSIS
calculate and interpret financial ratios used in credit analysis

3

418

Learning Module 16

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
Credit Analysis for Corporate Issuers

The use of financial ratios based upon the quantitative factors outlined in the prior
lesson allows credit analysts to assess the relative financial health of a company, identify
trends over time, and compare companies within and across industries with a focus
on profitability, coverage, and leverage. Common financial ratios used to evaluate a
corporate issuerвҖҷs credit risk are outlined in Exhibit 3.

Exhibit 3: Key Financial Ratios for Corporate Creditworthiness
Profitability

Coverage

EBIT Margin:

EBIT to Interest Expense:

Operating Income

Operating Income

Revenue

Interest Expense
Leverage

Debt to EBITDA:

RCF to Net Debt:

Debt

Retained Cash Flow (RCF)

EBITDA

Debt вҖ“ Cash and Marketable Securities

In general, credit risk analysis using profitability, coverage, and leverage ratios seeks
to establish a firmвҖҷs ability to service cash flows from operating activities, as opposed
to asset disposals or financing activities. Cash flow measures used in credit analysis,
such as free cash flow (FCF, or net income less working capital increases, investment
in fixed assets, and net interest paid), funds from operations (FFO, or net income
from continuing operations, depreciation and amortization, deferred income tax, and
other non-cash items), or retained cash flow (RCF, or net cash flow from operating
activities less dividends paid) are more conservative than others because they make
certain adjustments for cash used in managing and maintaining the business or distributed to shareholders. Debt and interest expense measures used in credit analysis
also may be adjusted for operating leases, debt-like fixed lease payments, and/or other
fixed off-balance-sheet obligations that impact a companyвҖҷs ability to service its debt.
These measures and the ratios developed based upon these measures are non-IFRS
in the sense that they do not have official IFRS definitions; the concepts, names, and
definitions given should be viewed as one usage among several possible, in most cases.
EBIT Margin: Credit analysts focus on EBIT (earnings before interest and taxes) to
determine a companyвҖҷs operating performance prior to capital costs and taxes, since
interest expense is paid before income taxes are calculated. In some cases, EBITDA
(or earnings before interest, taxes, depreciation, and amortization expense) is used
as a broader measure, which adds back (non-cash) depreciation and amortization
expense. Higher EBIT margins increase profits available to service debt.
EBIT to Interest Expense: This measures the degree to which operating profit covers periodic interest payments, with a higher coverage ratio representing less credit
risk. In some cases, the numerator is changed to include depreciation and amortization (EBITDA) as well as rental expense (EBITDAR), while the denominator may
be increased to include lease payments or reduced by interest earned on marketable
securities and cash.
Debt to EBITDA: Leverage ratios are often expressed with debt either in the
numerator or denominator, so care must be taken to reflect whether a greater or
lesser number reflects increased leverage. For example, a higher debt-to-EBITDA
ratio represents higher leverage, and debt may be adjusted to reflect operating leases
or off-balance-sheet commitments. Rating agencies often use it as a trigger for rating

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
Financial Ratios in Corporate Credit Analysis

actions, and banks reference it in loan covenants. A higher ratio indicates more leverage
and thus higher credit risk. Note that this ratio can be very volatile for companies with
high cash flow variability, such as those in cyclical industries and with high operating
leverage (fixed costs).
Retained Cash Flow (RCF) to Net Debt: Use of cash flow rather than earnings
measures is also common in measuring leverage, while here the debt measure is
reduced by available cash. A higher RCF to net debt measure implies lower leverage.
While financial ratios used in credit analysis vary across industries, the values of
financial ratios themselves for a given rating or level of credit quality may also range
widely across industries due to different business models, competitive pressures, and
other factors.
Credit analysts use financial modeling to evaluate how these ratios might change
over time as revenue drivers change, as in the following example:
EXAMPLE 4

Bowstream Corporation Credit Risk Assessment
A credit analyst has created a financial statement model to evaluate the credit
risk of Bowstream Corporation, a mid-sized, investment-grade consumer durables company. While BowstreamвҖҷs most recent financial results show a solid
10% sales growth and a robust 35% operating profit margin, the analyst would
like to assess BowstreamвҖҷs performance under a downside scenario where the
companyвҖҷs production and interest costs rise due to inflation amid slower sales
growth. Model assumptions used for BowstreamвҖҷs sales growth, cost of goods
sold as a percentage of sales, interest rates, and debt growth over the next five
years are as follows:
вҖӢ

Reported
Year 0

Projected
Year 1

Sales growth

10%

5%

5%

Cost of goods
sold/Sales

65%

70%

Interest rate on
debt

6%

Debt growth rate

10%

Year 2 Year 3

Year 4

Year 5

5%

5%

5%

75%

80%

85%

85%

7%

7%

7%

8%

8%

10%

10%

10%

10%

10%

вҖӢ

Selected financial data and projections from these three-statement model
results based on these assumptions and stable ratios of balance sheet and other
positions to sales are as follows:
вҖӢ

Income Statement

Year 0

Year 1

Year 2

Year 3

Year 4

Year 5

Sales

5,225

5,486

5,761

6,049

6,351

6,669

Cost of goods sold

(3,396)

(3,840) (4,320) (4,839) (5,398) (5,668)

Gross profit

1,829

1,646

1,440

1,210

953

1,000

35%

30%

25%

20%

15%

15%

Selling, general, and
administrative

(499)

(524)

(550)

(577)

(606)

(637)

Interest payments on debt

(38)

(46)

(51)

(56)

(72)

(83)

Gross profit (%)

Interest earned on cash and
mktable sec
Depreciation

12

12

12

12

12

12

(400)

(467)

(517)

(547)

(559)

(552)

419

420

Learning Module 16

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
Credit Analysis for Corporate Issuers

Income Statement

Year 0

Year 1

Year 2

Year 3

Year 4

Year 5

Profit before tax

905

621

335

41

(273)

(259)

Taxes

(317)

(217)

(117)

(14)

95

90

Net income

588

404

218

27

(177)

(168)

Net income (% of sales)

11%

7%

4%

0%

вҲ’3%

вҲ’3%

Dividends

(118)

(81)

(44)

(5)

вҖ”

вҖ”

Retained earnings

470

323

174

21

(177)

(168)

вҖӢ

вҖӢ

Balance Sheet

Year 0

Year 1

Year 2

Year 3

Year 4

Year 5

400

400

400

400

400

400

627

658

691

726

762

800

Cost basis

5,993

6,840

7,594

8,233

8,735

9,256

Accumulated depreciation

(2,400) (2,867) (3,383) (3,931) (4,490) (5,042)

Cash and marketable
securities

Current assets
Fixed assets

Net fixed assets

Total assets:

Current liabilities

Debt

Stock (225 shares issued
@ 10)

Accumulated retained
earnings

Total liabilities and equity

3,593

3,973

4,211

4,303

4,244

4,214

4,620

5,032

5,302

5,428

5,407

5,414

523

549

576

605

635

667

627

690

759

835

960

1,104

2,250

2,250

2,250

2,250

2,250

2,250

1,220

1,543

1,718

1,739

1,562

1,394

4,620

5,032

5,302

5,428

5,407

5,414

вҖӢ

вҖӢ

Consolidated Statement of
Cash Flows

Year 0

Year 1

Year 2

Year 3

Year 4

Year 5

Net cash from operating
activities

978

866

729

568

376

377

Net cash used in investing
activities

(918)

(847)

(754)

(639)

(501)

(521)

Net cash from financing
activities

(61)

(18)

25

71

125

144

вҖӢ

The analyst uses data from these three-statement model results to solve for
recent and projected profitability, coverage, and leverage ratios in Exhibit 3:
вҖӢ

Year 0

Year 1

Year 2

Year 3

Year 4

Year 5

EBIT

1,330

1,122

890

632

346

364

EBITDA

1,730

1,589

1,407

1,180

906

916

FFO (Net cash from operating activities)

978

866

729

568

376

377

RCF (FFO вҲ’ Dividends)

861

785

685

563

376

377

EBIT margin

25%

20%

15%

10%

5%

5%

EBIT to Interest expense

51.9

32.9

23.0

14.4

5.8

5.2

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
Financial Ratios in Corporate Credit Analysis

Year 0

Year 1

Year 2

Year 3

Year 4

Year 5

Debt to EBITDA

0.36

0.43

0.54

0.71

1.06

1.21

RCF to Net debt

379%

271%

191%

130%

67%

54%

вҖӢ

Under this scenario, Bowstream faces declining profitability (as EBIT margin
falls), weaker debt coverage (lower EBIT-to-interest expense), and increased
leverage (a higher debt to EBITDA and lower RCF to net debt), which is likely
to lead to wider credit spreads and a potential ratings downgrade.
In order to measure these changes, analysts often compare existing and projected
ratios to industry and credit rating peers to determine expected future credit quality
changes as categorized by expected rating. For example, consider the following comparisons based upon MoodyвҖҷs ratings methodology and these ratios for consumer
durables:

421

422

Learning Module 16

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
Credit Analysis for Corporate Issuers

EBIT Margin

Profitability

30%
Aa
A

20%

Baa
Ba

10%

B

0%
t+1

t

t+2

t+3

EBIT to Interest
Expense
50

t+4

t+5

Time

Coverage

40

30

20

Aaa
Aa

10

A
Baa

Ba
B

0
t

t+1

t+2

t+3

Retained Cash Flow
(RCF) to Net Debt
300%

t+4

t+5

Time

Leverage

200%

100%

Aaa
Aa
A
Ba
B

Baa
0%
t

t+1

t+2

t+3

t+4

t+5

Time

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
Financial Ratios in Corporate Credit Analysis

Debt to EBITDA

Leverage

3x
Baa
2x
A
1x
Aa
Aaa

0
t

t+1

t+2

t+3

t+4

t+5

Time

Source: MoodyвҖҷs Investors Service, вҖңMethodology Announcement: MoodyвҖҷs Updates Its Methodology
for Rating Consumer Durables CompaniesвҖқ (10 September 2021).

QUESTION SET
1. Identify the key credit analysis ratios that correspond to the types of
metrics:
A. RCF/Debt
B. EBITDA/Interest Expense
C. Debt/Capital
D. EBITDA
E. Debt/EBITDA
F. FCF
G. EBIT/Interest Expense

1. Profitability and cash flow metrics
2. Leverage metrics
3. Coverage metrics
Solution:
1. Profitability and cash flow metrics: D, F
2. Leverage metrics: A, C, E
3. Coverage metrics: B, G
2. State true or false to the following statement and explain your reasoning:
The higher the coverage ratios, the higher the credit risk of the borrower.
Solution:

False. Coverage ratios measure an issuerвҖҷs ability to cover its interest
payments. The higher the coverage ratios, the lower the credit risk of the
borrower.

423

424

Learning Module 16

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
Credit Analysis for Corporate Issuers

3. Calculate FFO/debt based on the following financial information:
вҖӢ

Net income from continuing operations

180

Depreciation & amortization

30

Deferred income taxes

18

Other non-cash items

28

Increase in working capital

(52)

Dividend paid

(60)

Capital expenditure

(100)

Debt

1,280
вҖӢ

Solution:
FFO = Net income from continuing operations + Depreciation & amortization + Deferred income taxes + Other non-cash items = 180 + 30 + 18 + 28
= 256.
FFO/debt = 256/1,280 = 0.2 or 20%.
4. Company X and Company Y operate in the same industry. Based on the
financial information below, which company has lower credit risk?
вҖӢ

Company X

Company Y

EBITDA margin

15%

15%

FCF

(20)

20

FCF before dividends

(45)

18

Debt/EBITDA

2.5

1.6

EBITDA/interest expense

3.0

3.5

вҖӢ

Solution:
Company Y has lower credit risk. While Company X and Company Y have
the same EBITDA margin, Company Y has positive FCF and FCF before
dividends, a lower leverage ratio, and a higher coverage ratio than Company
X.

4

SENIORITY RANKINGS, RECOVERY RATES, AND
CREDIT RATINGS
describe the seniority rankings of debt, secured versus unsecured
debt and the priority of claims in bankruptcy, and their impact on
credit ratings
The debt obligations of a corporate borrower often have different seniority rankings.
Some companies and industries have straightforward capital structures, with all the
debt equally ranked and issued by one main operating entity. Other companies and
industries, due to acquisitions and divestitures (e.g., media companies or conglomerates) or regulation (e.g., banks and utilities), have more complex debt structures. Firms

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
Seniority Rankings, Recovery Rates, and Credit Ratings

in these industries often have many different subsidiaries, or operating companies,
that have their own debt outstanding and parent holding companies that also issue
debt with different seniority levels.

Seniority Rankings
A seniority ranking refers to the priority of payment, with the most senior or
highest-ranking debt having the first claim on the cash flows and assets of the issuer.
The level of seniority affects the value of an investorвҖҷs claim in the event of default
and restructuring. Secured debt involves a debtholder claimвҖ”a pledge from the
issuerвҖ”to certain assets and their associated cash flows. This collateral reduces the
lenderвҖҷs potential loss in the event of default, as the lender may take possession of
and sell these assets to offset their losses. Seniority rankings involving secured and
unsecured debt are shown in Exhibit 4.

Exhibit 4: Seniority Rankings
Seniority
Highest Ranking
First Lien/Mortgage

Secured Debt
(Lower LGD)

Senior Secured

Bondholder has direct
claim on certain assets
and associated cash flows

Junior Secured

Senior Unsecured
Senior Subordinated
Subordinated

Unsecured Debt
(Higher LGD)
Bondholder has general
claim on certain assets
and associated cash flows

Junior Subordinated
Lowest Ranking

Secured versus Unsecured Debt
First mortgage and first lien debt are ranked highest among secured creditors in terms
of priority of repayment. First mortgage debt or loan refers to the pledge of specific
property (e.g., a power plant for a utility). First lien debt or loan refers to a pledge of
certain assets that could include buildings but might also include property and equipment, licenses, patents, brands, or inventory. As the name implies, second lien secured
debt has a secured interest in the pledged assets that ranks below first lien debt in
both collateral protection and priority of payment. Most second lien loans are senior
secured obligations of the borrower, which rank above junior secured obligations.
Unsecured bondholders have only a general claim on an issuerвҖҷs assets and cash
flows. In the event of default, unsecured debtholdersвҖҷ claims rank below (i.e., get paid
after) those of secured creditors under what is known as the priority of claims.

425

426

Learning Module 16

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
Credit Analysis for Corporate Issuers

The highest-ranked unsecured debt is senior unsecured debt. It is the most
common type of corporate bond, ranking below senior secured debt but above subordinated debt. Other, lower-ranked debt includes subordinated debt and junior
subordinated debt. Among the various creditor classes, these obligations have the
lowest priority of claims and frequently have little or no recovery in the event of
default (i.e., an LGD of 100%).
Different seniority rankings satisfy the needs and demands of both issuers and
investors. Issuers seek to optimize their cost of capitalвҖ”in some cases offering secured
debt to meet investor requirements, as in the earlier Royal Caribbean example, and in
other cases offering subordinated debt, which is less costly than equity and non-dilutive.
The seniority of debt drives decisions in the case of bankruptcy or liquidation. Senior
creditors with a secured claim have the right to the value of specific assets before any
other claim. If the value of the pledged property is less than the amount of the claim,
then the difference becomes a senior unsecured claim. Senior unsecured creditors
take priority over all subordinated creditors, who in turn have the right to be paid in
full before shareholders receive any compensation. Example 5 shows differences in
repayment seniority.
EXAMPLE 5

VIVU Bond
The 6.5% VIVU seven-year callable notes were introduced earlier in the
curriculum.
вҖӢ

6.5% Vivivyu Inc. (VIVU) 7-Year Callable Notes
Issuer:

Vivivyu Incorporated

Maturity Date:

Principal Amount:
Interest:
Interest Payment:

7 Years
USD400 million
6.5% fixed coupon
Semi-annual

Seniority:

The Notes are secured and unsubordinated obligations of
VIVU and rank pari passu with all other secured and unsubordinated debt.

Security:

The Notes are secured by a pledge of certain assets as identified in the Indenture.
вҖӢ

Assume VIVU also has a 10-year subordinated bond outstanding with the
following terms:
вҖӢ

10.0% Vivivyu Inc. (VIVU) 10-Year Subordinated Notes
Issuer:

Maturity Date:
Principal
Amount:

Interest:
Interest Payment:

Vivivyu Incorporated
10 years
USD300 million
10.0% fixed coupon
Semi-annual

Seniority:

The Notes will constitute direct, unsecured, and subordinated
obligations of the Issuer and shall rank pari passu and without
any preference among themselves.

Security:

None
вҖӢ

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
Seniority Rankings, Recovery Rates, and Credit Ratings

While the 6.5% notes are senior secured debts, the 10.0% notes are unsecured
subordinated debt.
In an insolvency or a restructuring event, the 6.5% notes rank highest in the
payment priority as they are backed by certain specified assets as a secondary
source of repayment. If the value of the collateral falls short of the total amount
of pari passu secured debt, the balance will rank pari passu with senior unsecured
creditors in insolvency or restructuring.
The 10.0% subordinated notes rank below senior secured and senior unsecured debt in the priority of claims, but above junior subordinated debts (if any)
and shareholders. These notes have among the lowest priority of claims in an
event of default and often have the lowest recovery rate.

Recovery Rates
All creditors at the same debt seniority level are treated as one class; thus, a senior
unsecured bondholder whose debt is due in 30 years has the same pro rata (pari
passu) claim in bankruptcy as one whose debt matures in six months. Defaulted debt
often continues to trade near the expected recovery rate for bonds expected to enter
bankruptcy or liquidation. Recovery rates vary by seniority ranking based upon the
priority of claims.
Historical default data provide statistically meaningful recovery rates by seniority
ranking. Exhibit 5 shows recovery rates by seniority ranking for North American
non-financial companies. For example, as shown in Exhibit 5, investors recovered
45.9% of the value of defaulted senior secured debt in 2019 but only 31.3% of defaulted
senior unsecured issues that year.

Exhibit 5: Average Corporate Debt Recovery Rates (%)
Emergence Year

Default Year

Priority Position

2020

2019

1987вҖ“2020

2020

2019

1987вҖ“2020

Term Loans*

48.5

58.1

72.6

50.1

52.7

86.3

34.8

45.9

61.4

34.8

44.6

61.4

8.6

31.3

46.9

8.6

40.5

46.9

0.9

24.7

27.9

0.9

24.7

27.9

Senior Secured
Bonds

Senior Unsecured
Bonds
Subordinated
Bonds

* Includes all types of term loans: first, second-lien, unsecured.
Notes: Emergence year is typically the year the defaulted company emerges from bankruptcy. Default
year data refer to the recovery rate of debt that defaulted in that year (i.e., 2019 and 2020) or range of
years (i.e., 1987вҖ“2020). Data are for North American nonfinancial companies.
Source: MoodyвҖҷs Investors Service, вҖңDefault Trends вҖ” Global: Annual Default Study: Following a Sharp
Rise in 2020, Corporate Defaults Will Drop in 2021вҖқ (28 January 2021).

Recovery rates:
1. vary widely by industry,
2. vary depending on when they occur in the cycle, and
3. represent averages across industries and companies.

427

428

Learning Module 16

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
Credit Analysis for Corporate Issuers

Companies entering bankruptcy in industries in secular decline usually have lower
recovery rates than those merely facing cyclical economic downturn. Exhibit 6 shows
the distribution of selected recovery rates between 1983 and 2020 across industries
and debt seniority levels.

Exhibit 6: Recovery Rates across Selected Industries, 1983вҖ“2020, Measured
by Trading Prices before Default (%)

Industry Groups

1st Lien Bond

Senior Unsecured
Bond

Subordinated
Bond

Automotive

57.94

46.08

49.46

Capital Equipment

62.34

36.69

45.48

Energy: Electricity

81.48

58.24

39.45

Energy: Oil & Gas

56.55

36.33

39.10

Environmental

13.00

29.73

5.44

Finance

47.60

45.68

27.80

High-Tech Industries

53.51

33.08

23.71

Retail

57.78

36.30

21.68

Services: Business

71.14

46.83

46.22

Telecommunications

56.80

26.22

31.61

Average recovery rate*

53.04

41.80

34.69

Highest recovery rate*

96.25

92.00

63.56

Lowest recovery rate*

7.00

22.18

1.47

* Calculated for all the 33 industries identified by MoodyвҖҷs.
Note: Average defaulted corporate bond and loan recoveries by selected industries, 1983вҖ“2020.
Source: MoodyвҖҷs Investors Service, вҖңDefault Trends вҖ” Global: Annual Default Study: Following a Sharp
Rise in 2020, Corporate Defaults Will Drop in 2021вҖқ (28 January 2021).

Recovery rates also vary depending upon when they occur in the credit cycle. When
the economy is strong or improving, robust markets exist for the resale of collateral
and recovery rates are therefore higher. Conversely, when the economy is weak or
weakening, lendersвҖҷ ability to liquidate assets at or near the original value is diminished and recovery rates fall.
Importantly, these recovery rates are averages, with high variability across industries and companies within a given industry. Factors include the composition and
proportion of debt across an issuerвҖҷs capital structure. An abundance of secured debt
will lead to smaller recovery rates on lower-ranked debt. Understanding recovery rates
is important because they are a key component of credit analysis and risk, as shown
in the following knowledge check.

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
Seniority Rankings, Recovery Rates, and Credit Ratings

KNOWLEDGE CHECK: EXPECTED LOSS
1. The one-year forward default rate for an issuer in the automotive
industry is expected to be 0.8%. What is the expected percentage credit loss
of the issuerвҖҷs bonds under the historical recovery rate assumptions (see
Exhibit 5)?
вҖӢ

Senior secured bond

58%

Senior unsecured bond

46%

Subordinated bond

23%
вҖӢ

Solution:
Recall from an earlier lesson that:
Expected loss (EL) = POD Г— LGD
Senior secured bond: EL = 0.008 Г— (1 вҖ“ 0.58) = 0.00336 = 0.336%
Senior unsecured bond: EL = 0.008 Г— (1 вҖ“ 0.46) = 0.00432 = 0.432%
Subordinated bond: EL = 0.008 Г— (1 вҖ“ 0.23) = 0.00616 = 0.616%
The priority of claims in bankruptcy under which the highest-ranked creditors
get paid out first, followed by the next level, and so on, is a well-established legal
standard. However, creditors with lower seniority and even shareholders may receive
consideration without more senior creditors being satisfied in full, since bankruptcy
resolution takes time. By compensating subordinated debt holders, senior debt holders
can accelerate the bankruptcy process.
During bankruptcy, legal and accounting fees can be substantial, and the company
value may decline as key employees and customers leave and competitors actively gain
market share. Claimants therefore have an incentive to negotiate and compromise,
leading to creditors with lower seniority and other claimants receiving more consideration than they are legally entitled to.
While a bias in the United States toward reorganization and recovery of companies in bankruptcy exists, elsewhere it is more common to liquidate companies in
bankruptcy and maximize value to bank lenders and other senior creditors. Since
bankruptcy and bankruptcy laws are very complex and can vary greatly by country,
it is difficult to generalize how creditors will fare under a default scenario.

Issuer and Issue Ratings
Rating agencies typically provide both issuer and issue ratings for corporate debt.
Terminology used to distinguish between issuer and issue ratings includes corporate
family rating (CFR) and corporate credit rating (CCR), or issuer credit rating and individual issue credit rating. An issuer rating usually applies to its senior unsecured debt
and addresses an obligorвҖҷs overall creditworthiness. On the other hand, an individual
issue rating refers to specific financial obligations of an issuer and takes such factors
as seniority into account. While the probability of default (POD) for an issuer and
its issues may be the same due to cross-default provisions, issuer ratings may differ
due to loss given default (LGD) differences because of seniority, subordination, and
sources of repayment. This rating adjustment methodology is known as notching.

429

430

Learning Module 16

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
Credit Analysis for Corporate Issuers

EXAMPLE 6

Royal Caribbean Unsecured Debt
As the COVID-19 pandemic began to subside and Royal Caribbean (RCL)
announced its resumption of cruise operations in 2021, the company once again
approached the debt markets in March, this time with a $1.5 billion 7-year
unsecured note issuance used primarily to repay existing debt and to raise cash
for other debt maturities. At the time of issuance, RCL had a MoodyвҖҷs B1 corporate family rating (CFR), while the new unsecured debt issue was rated B2. The
companyвҖҷs senior secured notes, on the other hand, were rated three notches
higher, or Ba2, due to the vessels and intellectual property used as collateral, as
described in Example 2.
While POD and LGD are the primary factors in assigning ratings, another factor
considered by rating agencies is structural subordination, which can arise when a
corporation with a holding company structure has debt at both its parent holding
company and operating subsidiaries. Operating subsidiary debt is serviced by the cash
flow and assets of the subsidiaries before funds can be passed (вҖңupstreamedвҖқ) to the
holding company to service parent level debt.
Different payment priorities and possible higher (or lower) LGDs give rise to a
rating agency notching process where issue credit ratings are moved up or down
from the issuer rating. Generally, the higher the senior unsecured rating, the smaller
the notching adjustment due to a lower perceived risk of default. That is, the need to
вҖңnotchвҖқ the rating to capture the potential difference in loss severity is greatly reduced.
For lower-rated credits, however, the risk of default is greater and thus the potential
LGD difference in loss from a lower (or higher) priority ranking carries greater weight
in assessing an issueвҖҷs credit riskiness. Thus, the rating agencies will typically apply
larger rating adjustments. Rating agencies differ in their approaches, as discussed in
Example 7 below.
EXAMPLE 7

Different Approaches to Credit Ratings
While all the major rating agencies consider POD and EL in assigning their
credit ratings, which ultimately reflect the agenciesвҖҷ forward-looking opinion of
the relative level of credit risk, nuanced differences exist between credit rating
agencies.
For example, MoodyвҖҷs defines credit risk as вҖңthe risk that an entity may not
meet its contractual financial obligations as they come due and any estimated
financial loss in the event of default or impairment.вҖқ In so doing, the rating
agency considers recovery as a rating factor in evaluating the creditworthiness
of debt (especially for speculative-grade debt). In other words, its rating scale
principally reflects EL.
On the other hand, S&P Global Ratings assigns credit ratings that primarily
reflect POD. The agency issues separate recovery ratings in addition to rating
specific debt issues. These recovery ratings consider the relative seniority and
loss severity of particular issues in the event of default. S&P may also consider
recovery ratings in making its notching adjustments.

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
Seniority Rankings, Recovery Rates, and Credit Ratings

Fitch Ratings takes a similar approach to S&P. Fitch assigns Issuer Default
Ratings (вҖңIDRsвҖқ) reflecting a POD view. Notching adjustments then apply to
issue ratings by considering recovery expectations for specific issues.
(Sources: MoodyвҖҷs, S&P, and Fitch.)

QUESTION SET
1. A company with the following simplified balance sheet faces impairment on its net current assets (other than cash) of USD90. Identify the
potential recovery of the companyвҖҷs debt according to the priority of claims
in an event of default:
вҖӢ

Assets

USD

Liabilities & Equity

USD

Cash

40

Secured bank loans (secured
by cash collateral)

30

Net Current Assets (other than
Cash)

100

Unsecured bonds

90

Net Fixed Assets

60

Subordinated bonds

10

Common shares

40

Retained earnings

30

Total Liabilities & Equity

200

Total Assets

200
вҖӢ

A. Shareholders and subordinated debtholders receive zero recovery,
while unsecured bondholders receive partial recovery.
B. Unsecured debtholders receive zero recovery as the impairment equals
the amount of unsecured debt outstanding.
C. Subordinated and unsecured bondholders both face partial recovery,
as the impairment is greater than the sum of these bonds outstanding.
Solution:
A is correct. The seniority ranking of the capital structure is as follows:
Secured bank loans > Unsecured bonds > Subordinated bonds > Equity
The USD90 impairment will initially be absorbed by the companyвҖҷs most
junior claim, equity (including common shares and retained earnings), with
a total equity value of USD70 (40 + 30 = 70).
The remaining USD20 (USD90 вҖ“ USD70) impairment balance will be borne
by the next junior claim, subordinated bonds. As subordinated bonds total
just USD10, they have zero recovery.
The remaining USD10 impairment is allocated to the unsecured bonds. The
USD10 impairment reduces the recovery to USD80 (USD90 вҖ“ USD10). The
USD30 bank loans secured by cash collateral are unaffected, as the cash
collateral value of USD40 fully covers this loan.
2. State true/false to the following statement and explain your reasoning:
Notching is the rating adjustment process whereby the credit rating of a
corporate issuer can be moved up or down from the sovereign credit rating.
Solution:

False. Notching is the rating adjustment process whereby the credit rating of
a bond can be moved up or down from the issuer credit rating.

431

432

Learning Module 16

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
Credit Analysis for Corporate Issuers

3. Why is the probability of default likely to be the same for all unsubordinated
bonds of an issuer?
Solution:

Cross-default provisions exist where an event of default on one bond triggers default on all outstanding debt, implying the same default probability
for all issues. However, issue ratings may differ due to LGD differences.
4. An issuer credit rating assigned by the rating agencies reflects the:
A. recovery rate of a specific debt of the issuer.
B. expected credit loss of all the issuerвҖҷs outstanding debt.
C. probability of default of the issuerвҖҷs senior unsecured debt.
Solution:
The correct answer is C. An issuer credit rating usually applies to the issuerвҖҷs
senior unsecured debt and is meant to address the issuerвҖҷs overall creditworthiness in the form of probability of default (and for some rating agencies,
both probability of default and expected recovery).

Practice Problems

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.

PRACTICE PROBLEMS
The following information relates to questions
1-9
The following questions are related to Mojofon Holdings:
Mojofon Holdings specializes in the design, manufacturing, and marketing of its
own branded smartphones. An evolving sector, the smartphone market is dominated by few large firms who together have close to 70% of the global market.
MojofonвҖҷs global market share is consistently around 3%, and it is positioned as a
niche player.
An industry assessment leads to the following observations:
в– 

Competition of the smartphone industry is intense, driven by consistent
technology upgrades and new models with short product life cycles. The
large investment and marketing budgets of dominant players have sustained
high industry concentration.

в– 

New entrants positioned as niche producers of вҖңcultвҖқ models like Mojofon
consistently compete for market share.

в– 

Customers are вҖңprice-takers,вҖқ as smartphones are seen as a necessity. Pricing
is usually set by the top three producers, and small firms have little pricing
power. Surveys show that customers defer new phone purchases unless they
have damaged their phones or there is a leap in technology.

в– 

Core mobile phone technology, such as semiconductor chips and mobile
operating licenses, are concentrated among few key suppliers that command
large profit margins at the expense of phone manufacturers.

в– 

Smartphone shipment has seen low growth in recent years due to market
saturation and high penetration, limited technological advancement, and
an economic slowdown. There are signs the sector is maturing. Industry
concentration is increasing, with the top five firms accounting for 60вҖ“70% of
global shipment and industry profit.

1. Based on her smartphone industry assessment, the credit analyst concludes that
MojofonвҖҷs debt service capacity is low because:
A. the threat of substitutes is low.
B. the threat of new entrants and bargaining power of customers are low.
C. the industry rivalry and the bargaining power of suppliers are high.
2. Based on the overall industry assessment, the credit analyst concludes that the
credit conditions for Mojofon will most likely:
A. tighten because the sector is maturing, and industry concentration is
increasing.
B. remain unchanged because MojofonвҖҷs market share is constant despite low
industry growth.

433

434

Learning Module 16

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
Credit Analysis for Corporate Issuers

C. expand since niche market entrants are consistently seizing market share
from dominant firms.
3. Which of the following will most likely reduce MojofonвҖҷs near-term default risk?
A. A new policy to increase dividends on a steady basis
B. A three-year strategy to pursue acquisitions funded by debt
C. Proactive management of debt maturity by issuing longer-term bonds
4. The credit analyst studies the key financial information of Mojofon and that of its
peers below:
Mojofon
Key Credit Metrics

Prior Year

Current Year

Peer Average
Current Year

EBITDA

27

20

55

Revenue

121

100

305

FCF

9

вҲ’5

40

FCF after dividends

5

вҲ’7

32

Interest expense

5

8

10

Total debt

100

100

150

Total equity

120

100

250

Debt/capital for Mojofon for the current year is closest to:
A. 37.5%.
B. 50.0%.
C. 100.0%.
5. The outstanding bonds of Mojofon contain a covenant that requires its EBITDA/
Interest coverage ratio to be above 3.0. Based on coverage ratio analysis, Mojofon
most likely:
A. has improved its coverage ratio.
B. is in breach of this bond covenant.
C. has lower credit risk than its peers.
6. Based on the financial information, MojofonвҖҷs credit risk is:
A. below that of its peers.
B. similar to that of its peers.
C. above that of its peers.

Practice Problems

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.

7. MojofonвҖҷs capital structure consists of the following:
Type

Amount

Senior secured bonds
(pledged by collateral valued at 60)

50

Senior unsecured bonds

35

Subordinated bonds

15

Common equity

100

MojofonвҖҷs bonds all contain a cross-default provision. If the company is to default
on one of its senior unsecured bonds:
A. the secured bonds are likely to have full recovery.
B. the credit loss on senior unsecured bonds will be the same as that on subordinated bonds.
C. the subordinated bonds will rank below shareholders, who may dictate how
recovery is to be distributed.
8. Half of MojofonвҖҷs senior unsecured bonds are issued by its major operating
subsidiary, which contributes over 90% of the groupвҖҷs cash flow and assets, and
the remainder of the groupвҖҷs senior unsecured bonds are issued by the holding
company that relies on dividend upstreamed by its subsidiaries. There is no
cross-guarantee between the holding company and the subsidiary. In an event of
default, it is most likely that:
A. the unsecured bonds issued by the holding company will have a higher
recovery rate.
B. the unsecured bonds issued by the operating subsidiary will have a higher
recovery rate.
C. the recovery rate will be the same for all senior unsecured bonds since they
rank pari passu with each other.
9. MojofonвҖҷs S&P issuer credit rating is B+. Its S&P subordinated bond issue rating
is most likely:
A. BB вҖ“.
B. B+.
C. B вҖ“.

435

436

Learning Module 16

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
Credit Analysis for Corporate Issuers

SOLUTIONS
1. The correct answer is C. Based on the industry assessment:
Competitive Forces

Intensity

Capacity to Support Debt

Threat of new entrants

Low

High

Bargaining power of suppliers

High

Low

Bargaining power of customers

Low

High

Threat of substitutes

Low

High

Industry rivalry

High

Low

Industry rivalry and bargaining power of suppliers are all high intensity, implying
low capacity to support debt.
2. The correct answer is A. If the industry is maturing with low growth and the
market becomes further concentrated among a few dominant firms, credit conditions for smaller smartphone producers will most likely tighten.
3. The correct answer is C. Extending debt maturity proactively will help extend
MojofonвҖҷs debt maturity profile and reduce near-term default risk. B is incorrect,
as debt-funded acquisitions reduce future cash flow certainty and increase credit
risk. A is incorrect since increasing the dividend is a shareholder-friendly action
that increases leverage and credit risk.
4. The correct answer is B. Debt/capital = Debt / (Debt + Equity)
= 100/(100 + 100) = 0.5 or 50% for Mojofon for the current year.
5. The correct answer is B. EBITDA/Interest coverage for Mojofon for the current
year = 20/8 = 2.5. The corresponding ratio for the prior year = 27/5 = 5.4. Therefore, MojofonвҖҷs coverage ratio has deteriorated, and the company has breached its
coverage ratio covenant (>= 3.0). On the other hand, EBITDA/Interest among its
peers = 55/10 = 5.5, which is much better than that of Mojofon. Based on coverage ratio analysis, Mojofon has higher, not lower, credit risk than its peers.
6. The correct answer is C. Despite the better profit measure, EBITDA margin, versus its peers, MojofonвҖҷs cash flow measures, leverage, and coverage ratios are all
considerably worse than its peers. Therefore, it has higher credit risk.
7. The correct answer is A. Senior secured bonds rank the highest in the priority of
claims, and their recovery depends on the value of the asset collateral. Since the
value of asset collateral (60) exceeds the amount of secured bonds outstanding
(50), the secured bonds are likely to have full recovery in an event of default.
Senior unsecured bonds have higher priority over subordinated bonds, which in
turn have higher priority over common equity in insolvency.
8. The correct answer is B. Senior unsecured bonds issued by the holding company
are said to be structurally subordinated to those issued by the major operating
subsidiary. Debt at the operating subsidiary will be serviced by the cash flow and
assets of the subsidiary first before any funds can be upstreamed to the holding
company to service debt at that level.
Since the operating subsidiary accounts for over 90% of the groupвҖҷs cash flow and
assets but only half of the groupвҖҷs senior unsecured debt, the holding company
debt can only be serviced after the operating subsidiary debt is paid in full. The

Solutions

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.

unsecured bonds issued by the subsidiary will most likely have higher recovery.
9. The correct answer is C. An issuer credit rating is the rating applied to a companyвҖҷs senior unsecured debt. The rating agency will usually apply a notching
adjustment to the lower-ranked subordinated debt, whose rating should therefore
be lower than that of the senior unsecured debt.

437

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.

LEARNING MODULE

17

Fixed-Income Securitization
LEARNING OUTCOMES
Mastery

The candidate should be able to:
explain benefits of securitization for issuers, investors, economies,
and financial markets
describe securitization, including the parties and the roles they play

INTRODUCTION
Asset-backed securities (ABS) are securities backed by and repaid from a pooled group
of loans or receivables. Creating securities that are repaid from particular types of
loans or receivables transfers risk, provides flexibility to issuers and investors, and
efficiently allocates capital. In a securitization, cash flows from a designated pool of
assets are redistributed by a special purpose issuer to pay interest and principal to
investors in a predetermined manner. Thus, ABS transactions create an entire new
subordination structure on the designated pool of assets. Securitization takes place
around the world вҖ” in the Americas, Asia, and Europe. This first of three Fixed-Income
Learning Modules describes the benefits of securitization, the securitization process,
and typical securitization structures.
LEARNING MODULE OVERVIEW
в– 

Securitization benefits investors by redistributing payment
risks, enhancing the predictability of payments, diminishing the impact of unexpected changes in payment patterns (such as
defaults, prepayments, or payment extensions), helping investors
match risk, return and maturity needs, and reducing risk through various credit enhancements.

в– 

Securitization enables issuers to operate more efficiently on a risk-adjusted basis by removing assets and lending risks from their balance
sheets (thereby reducing their leverage), expanding their capacity to
originate loans and to secure lower funding costs.

в– 

Securitization enhances financial market efficiency, improving overall
liquidity in the financial system and reducing liquidity risk.

1

440

Learning Module 17

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
Fixed-Income Securitization

в– 

Several parties participate in a securitization, including the original
corporate issuers of the assets (for example, loans, receivables, leases,
or debt) to be securitized; a special purpose entity (SPE) created to
buy/own these corporate assets, create new assets from them, and
sell the new assets to investors; the servicer of the underlying loans or
debt; and other (third-party) entities (for example, accountants, attorneys, and underwriters).

в– 

When an original issuer elects to securitize assets, it first establishes
an SPE to which it sells the assets. The SPE then issues and sells to
investors securities backed by these assets. Interest and principal payments on the assets are used to pay the investors in the new securities.

в– 

The separate legal entity structure of the SPE is designed to protect
the underlying assets from any claims by creditors of the issuer should
the issuer go into financial distress. However, ABS investors should
evaluate the legal considerations of the actual jurisdiction where they
purchase an ABS, since legal frameworks vary by country.

LEARNING MODULE SELF-ASSESSMENT
These initial questions are intended to help you gauge your current level
of understanding of this learning module.
1. Which of the following asset-backed securities (ABS) is most complex?
A. Covered bonds
B. Pass-through securities
C. Collateralized mortgage obligations
Solution
C is correct. Collateralized mortgage obligations enhance the predictability
of payment patterns of pass-through securities by redistributing the cash
flows in the pool across the different tranches according to a preset schedule. A is incorrect because covered bonds are the simplest securitization
structure. The issuer segregates (but retains) the underlying loans/assets and
then uses the segregated loans/assets as collateral for the covered bonds it
issues. B is incorrect because pass-through securities, while true securitizations (meaning that the pool of assets is removed from the balance sheet and
transferred into a separate and independent legal entity), are not as complex
as collateralized mortgage obligations.
2. Which of the following legal documents in the securitization process describes the structure of the securitization, including the priority of payments
and the credit enhancements to be used?
A. Prospectus
B. Notes issued by the SPE
C. Purchase agreement between the seller of the collateral and the SPE
Solution
The correct answer is A. The prospectus describes the structure of the securitization, including the priority and amount of payments to be made to the
servicer, administrators, and the ABS holders, as well as the credit enhancements used in the securitization. B is incorrect because the notes issued by
the SPE are the actual asset-backed-securities (ABS), not legal documents

Introduction

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.

supporting the securitization process. C is incorrect because the purchase
agreement between the seller of the collateral and the SPE outlines the representations and warranties that the seller makes about the assets sold.
3. Identify the role that corresponds to each of the following participants in a
securitization:
вҖӢ

1. Seller

A. The entity that issues the ABS

2. Servicer

B. The entity that wishes to increase liquidity, lower funding
costs, and operate more efficiently on a risk-adjusted basis

3. SPE

C. The entity that collects payments from borrowers
вҖӢ

Solution
1. B is correct. By removing assets and lending risks from their balance
sheet, the seller can operate more efficiently on a risk-adjusted basis.
And, by selling the assets to an SPE, investors can rely on the default
risk associated with collecting payments from customers, rather than
the sellerвҖҷs credit quality and default risk. As a result, in aggregate, the
funding cost of a securitization may be lower than that of a corporate
bond issue.
2. C is correct. Loan servicing refers to administering any aspect of a
loan, including collecting payments from borrowers, notifying borrowers who may be delinquent, and recovering and disposing of
the underlying asset if the borrower does not make the payments as
scheduled.
3. A is correct. The SPE purchases the assets from the seller and then
issues and sells ABS backed by the pool of securitized assets.
4. Identify the benefit of securitization that corresponds most closely to each
of the following parties: (A. Economies and Financial Markets, B. Issuers, C.
Investors):
вҖӢ

1. By removing assets and lending risks from their balance sheet, _________ can operate more efficiently on
a risk adjusted basis. Ultimately, securitization enables
___________ to expand lending origination beyond their
balance sheets.
2. Securitization allows __________ to tailor interest rate
and credit risk exposures to suit their specific risk, return,
and maturity needs.
3. Securitization creates tradable securities with higher
liquidity than that of the original, thereby making
___________ more efficient, improving overall liquidity and
reducing liquidity risk
вҖӢ

Solution

441

442

Learning Module 17

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
Fixed-Income Securitization

вҖӢ

1. By removing assets and lending risks from their balance sheet, _________ can operate more efficiently on
a risk adjusted basis. Ultimately, securitization enables
___________ to expand lending origination beyond their
balance sheets.

A. Economies and
Financial Markets

2. Securitization allows __________ to tailor interest rate
and credit risk exposures to suit their specific risk, return,
and maturity needs.

C. Investors

3. Securitization creates tradable securities with higher
liquidity than that of the original, thereby making
___________ more efficient, improving overall liquidity and
reducing liquidity risk

B. Issuers

вҖӢ

1. A is correct. Securitization creates tradable securities with higher
liquidity than that of the original, thereby making economies and
financial markets more efficient, improving overall liquidity and
reducing liquidity risk
2. C is correct. Securitization allows investors to tailor interest rate and
credit risk exposures to suit their specific risk, return, and maturity
needs.
3. B is correct. By removing assets and lending risks from their balance
sheet, issuers can operate more efficiently on a risk adjusted basis.
Ultimately, securitization enables issuers to expand lending origination
beyond their balance sheets.

2

THE BENEFITS OF SECURITIZATION
explain benefits of securitization for issuers, investors, economies,
and financial markets
The securitization process pools and transfers the ownership of cash flow generating
assets, such as loans or receivables, from the original lender into a specially created
legal entity. The pool of assets are the securitized assets, also called the reference
portfolio or collateral. In turn, that legal entity issues securities backed by these pooled
assets to investors and uses the cash flows to pay interest and repay the principal to
investors. Securitization creates a direct link between investors and borrowers for
many types of loans and receivables, and it provides benefits for issuers and investors
as well as economies and financial markets. The steps of the securitization process
are outlined in Exhibit 1.

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
The Benefits of Securitization

Exhibit 1: The Securitization Process
Original source
of assets

Pooled assets
with similar
features

Asset transfer from originator to SPE

Special purpose
entity (SPE)

Asset-backed
securities (ABS)

ABS investors

SPE issues ABS to investors

There are several different types of securitized products. In order of increasing complexity, the following products are examples of ABS.
в– 

Covered bonds are the simplest securitization structure. The issuers, mainly
European banks, create a specific pool of mortgage loans on the balance
sheet of the bank and segregate it from other bank assets. This pool then
serves as collateral (вҖңcoverвҖқ) for bonds issued by the bank. Should the issuing bank default on a covered bond issue, investors can use the collateral
underlying the pool to receive payment. Covered bonds are not considered
full securitizations because the underlying assets are not transferred to a
separate independent SPE but rather remain on the issuing bankвҖҷs balance
sheet. Moreover, covered bond investors receive payment directly from the
bank and not from the cash flow generated by the specific pool of mortgage
loans.

в– 

Pass-through securities are true securitizations: The specific pool of assets
is removed from the balance sheet and transferred into a separate and
independent legal entity. That legal entity then issues securities backed by
these pooled assets. The investors in these securities receive the principal
and interest payments from the assets (often loans) in the pool as they are
вҖңpassed throughвҖқ the legal entity. Pass-through securities pass through the
payments proportionally across the different tranches and redistribute the
payment risks to investors seeking differing levels of risk exposures. The
payments investors receive vary and depend directly on the overall credit
risk of the pool and payment patterns.

в– 

Bonds with structural enhancements enhance the predictability of payment patterns of pass-through securities by redistributing the cash flows in
the pool across specified tranches according to a preset schedule. The set
payment schedule mitigates the impact of unexpected changes in payment
patterns, such as defaults, prepayments, or extended repayment periods.
Additionally, tranches are subordinated with lower tranches assuming
greater risks of defaults and changes in repayment patterns than higher
tranches. They may further mitigate and redistribute the potential credit
risk of a risky pool of securitized loans by adding various types of credit
enhancements to further reduce the risk investors are exposed to.

в– 

Mortgage-backed securities (MBS) are ABS backed by a pool of mortgages. A distinction is sometimes made between MBS and ABS backed by
non-mortgage assets. This distinction is common in the United States and is
shown in Exhibit 2.

443

444

Learning Module 17

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
Fixed-Income Securitization

Exhibit 2: Pass-Through Securities
Pass-Through Securities
Mortgage-backed securities

Non-Mortgage-backed securities

Subgroup
в– 

Residential Mortgage-Backed Securities (RMBS)

в– 

Commercial Mortgage-Backed Securities (CMBS)

в– 

Collateralized Mortgage Obligation (CMO)

в– 

Collateralized Debt Obligation (CDO)

в– 

Collateralized Loan Obligation (CLO)

в– 

Collateralized Bond Obligation (CBO)

в– 

Collateralized Debt Obligation Squared (CDO
Squared)

Exhibit 3: Securitization Structure and Tranche Cash Flows

Bonds with Structural Enhancements
ExampleвҖ”SPV (Trust)
Assets
(purchased by SPV)

Many Assets ($100)
Yield = MRR + 250
Cash flows

Liabilities
(securities issued by SPV)

Senior ($70)

Aaa/AAA
MRR + 40

Mezzanine ($20)

Baa/BBB
MRR + 250

Equity ($10)

Residual cash
flows

Subordination, or tranching, in the securitization transaction involves creating more
than one bond class or tranche, and the bond classes differ in how they receive cash
flows from the underlying pool of assets. The bond classes are classified as senior
bond classes or subordinated bond classes, and this structure is also referred to as
a senior/subordinated structure as seen in Exhibit 3. The subordinated bond classes
are sometimes called вҖңnon-senior bond classesвҖқ or вҖңjunior bond classes.вҖқ Since all
investors in a securitization are paid from the same underlying cash flow pool, the
tranching dictates the order of payments made to investors and the order in which
losses are absorbed by the investors.

Benefits to Issuers
Traditionally, banks underwrite loans to allow borrowers to finance various purchases
and direct investments. These bank loans, which typically remain on the balance sheet
of the bank until the loans are fully repaid, are relatively illiquid.
Banks act as the intermediary between borrowers and investors. If they can separate loan origination from loan financing, they can improve their profitability, earning
origination fees and reducing capital requirements for loans that are sold to investors,
as shown in Exhibit 4. As we learned in the example on asset-backed commercial
paper (ABCP) in an earlier learning module, by removing assets and lending risks

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
The Benefits of Securitization

from their balance sheet, banks sell illiquid assets and operate more efficiently on a
risk-adjusted basis. Selling assets also generates fee income. Ultimately, securitization
enables banks to expand lending origination beyond their balance sheets.

Exhibit 4: Banks and Securitization
Special Purpose Entity

Bank
Assets
Cash
Loans
Other assets

Liabilities
Deposits
Debt
Equity

Assets
Loans

Liabilities
ABS issued

Investors pay cash
for the ABS
issued by the SPE

Bank sells loans to the Special Purpose Entity
and receives cash

Without ABS as an investment instrument, investors wanting to gain exposure to
private debts would have to directly underwrite loans, hold some combination of bank
debt and common equity, or purchase loans from bank outright. Direct debt underwriting requires specialized skills in credit evaluation, origination, underwriting, and
servicing, and one has to assume the operational costs and business risks of banking.
ABS investment breaks down the wide range of skills and risks and redistributes them
to appropriate parties.

Benefits to Investors
Securitization provides a direct conduit between borrowers and investors, allowing
investors to tailor interest rate and credit risk exposures to suit their specific risk,
return, and maturity needs. Securitization transactions allow issuers to design riskвҖ“
return characteristics to satisfy the risk tolerance of investors.
Although few institutional or individual investors have the specialized resources
and expertise needed to originate, monitor, and collect the payments from the
underlying loans and receivables, many can invest in securities backed by such loans
or receivables. The ABS that are created by pooling these loans and receivables have
characteristics similar to those of a standard bond.
For example, a pension fund with a long-term horizon can use securitized debt
to achieve higher returns, match asset maturities to anticipated liability payout
dates, and increase diversity in its asset pool while maintaining the option to adjust
holdings quickly and cost-effectively. Thus, holding securitized debt helps pension
fund investors increase exposure to the riskвҖ“return characteristics of a wider range
of underlying assets.
EXAMPLE 1

Benefits of Securitized Debt for Long-term Investors
Pawas Singhvi, an investment manager for a defined benefit pension fund at a
large manufacturer, is discussing investment options and expectations with a new
associate, Kevin Epstein. Epstein asks why Singhvi holds a significant portion of
fund assets in securitized debt. Singhvi explains that a number of parameters and
expectations influence the investments selected for the pension fund, starting
with asset and income diversification. The fund seeks safe, diversified assets and
income streams, which offer low risk. Anticipated pension payments or outflows

445

446

Learning Module 17

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
Fixed-Income Securitization

from the fund drive the need for liquid and stable investments, which mature
or can be sold easily to match the timing of required cash outflows. Any fund
investments must be highly rated.
Because pension payouts take place over many years into the future, pension
assets must be invested long-term, too. And the fundвҖҷs assets must grow over
time in order to produce promised pension payments at the levels required in
the future. While public, government-issued debt is highly rated and typically
safe, it alone may not produce sufficient returns to meet future obligations. By
contrast, holding investment-grade, publicly traded, securitized debt, which can
be traded, allows us to garner higher returns and to respond quickly to changes
in market sentiment, risk sensitivity, or funding needs at low transaction costs.

Benefits to Economies and Financial Markets
Securitization creates tradable securities with higher liquidity than that of the original loans on the bankвҖҷs balance sheet, and trading securities in the secondary market
allows investors to determine equilibrium pricesвҖ”thereby making financial markets
more efficient. Securitization also improves overall liquidity in the financial system
and reduces liquidity risk.
An important benefit of securitization is that it provides an alternative means of
funding business operations beyond traditional financing tools, such as bonds, preferred
equity, and common equity. Companies can use securitization to reduce their funding
costs by pooling securitizable assets (often receivables and loans), which increases
their return on capital versus borrowing though traditional financing methods.
Securitization is beneficial to financial markets. Corporate issuers can facilitate
the process of selling their products by extending credit to their customers, usually
through their financing subsidiary. These subsidiaries specialize in financing and leasing and often issue much of the corporation's consolidated debt, selling receivables
either to a bank or directly to an SPE. The company can then securitize these loans,
receiving cash from the SPE that then sells them to investors. A company can use these
proceeds to fund financing for new customers and sell even more of their product. If
the company instead kept these loans to customers on their own balance sheet, they
would have to issue additional debt. That would increase their leverage, increase their
overall financing and funding costs, and reduce their credit quality. Securitizing loans
for their products allows companies to directly tap the financial markets and move
loans off their balance sheet. They can thus capture the benefits of a cheaper source
of funding without reducing the companyвҖҷs overall credit quality.
Securitizations may involve any number of revenue-generating assets owned by
companies from a variety of industries. Securitization provides efficiencies to the entire
system, benefiting many parties. Manufacturers are able to outsource debt servicing,
consumers benefit from reduced costs, and investors benefit from diversified investment opportunities. The following are some interesting examples of securitizations.
EXAMPLE 2

Examples of Securitizations
Notes securitized by music royalties and licensing agreements (which allow places
such as restaurants or retail stores to play popular music) have been issued. In
2019, the performing-rights company, SESAC, issued securitized bonds backed
by its music royalties and licensing agreements with more than 30,000 artists,
including Adele, Bob Dylan, Kesha, Gabriel Mann, and R.E.M. The largest piece
of the securitization was a fixed-rate note, worth $530 million with a weighted

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
The Benefits of Securitization

average life of 6.7 years. The note offered a yield of 5.25%. The smaller portion
of the deal was a floating-rate note, worth $30 million with a weighted average
life of 4.9 years, which was not publicly offered. This type of offering is known
as a вҖңwhole-business securitization.вҖқ This type of bond usually is backed by such
assets as restaurant franchise agreements or other unusual assets and typically
pays higher rates than more traditional ABS tied to consumer debt.
In 2021, Yum! Brands, the parent company of such fast-food chains as KFC,
Pizza Hut, and Taco Bell, issued USD2.3 billion in notes securitized by cash
flows from franchised Taco Bell locations through a special purpose subsidiary,
Taco Bell Funding.
Although securitization brings many benefits to economies, it is not without risks.
Broadly, these risks fall into two categories: risks that relate primarily to the timing of
the ABSвҖҷs cash flows, such as contraction risk and extension risk, and risks related to
the inherent credit risk of the loans and receivables backing the ABS. Later modules will
address how securitization structures reduce these risks. Some of these risks are widely
attributed to have precipitated the turmoil in financial markets during 2007вҖ“2009.
QUESTION SET
1. Identify three benefits of securitization to issuers of ABS.
Solution

1. By removing assets and lending risks from their balance sheet, banks
can sell illiquid assets and operate more efficiently on a risk-adjusted
basis.
2. Selling assets also generates fee income.
3. Ultimately, securitization enables banks to expand lending origination
beyond their balance sheets.
2. Identify two benefits of securitization to investors.
Solution

1. Securitization allows investors to tailor interest rate and credit risk
exposures to suit their specific risk, return, and maturity needs.
2. Securitization allows investors to gain exposure to a wider range of
imperfectly correlated assets to build more efficient and diversified
portfolios.
3. Matching asset maturities to anticipated liability payout dates and increasing diversity in an asset pool while maintaining the option to adjust holdings
quickly and cost-effectively is most likely a benefit to:
A. issuers.
B. investors.
C. economies and financial markets.
Solution
The correct answer is B. Matching asset maturities to anticipated liability
payout dates and increasing diversity in an asset pool while maintaining the
option to adjust holdings quickly and cost-effectively is most likely a benefit
to investors. For example, a pension fund with a long-term horizon can use
securitized debt gains to achieve higher returns, match asset maturities to

447

448

Learning Module 17

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
Fixed-Income Securitization

anticipated liability payout dates, and increase diversity in its asset pool
while maintaining the option to adjust holdings quickly and cost-effectively.
4. Determine if the following events associated with an ABS are more likely to
result in a benefit or a risk and identify for whom (issuers, investors, financial markets):
вҖӢ

Event

Benefit or Risk

For Whom

A. Change in the timing
of the cash flows
B. Change in the credit
worthiness of the associated ABS loans
C. Selling illiquid assets
D. Securitizing assets
вҖӢ

Solution
вҖӢ

Event

Benefit or Risk

For Whom

A. Change in the timing
of the cash flows

Risk

Investors вҖ“ Prepayment risk, the
uncertainty that cash flows will
differ from the schedule set forth
in the initial loan agreement, can
result either when interest rates
decline and borrowers pay off part
or all of their loans early or when
borrowers experience financial
duress and slow down their loan
payments.

B. Change in the credit
worthiness of the associated ABS loans

Risk

Investors вҖ“ If the borrowers
default on their loans, then the
SPE may not be able to make cash
payments to the security holders.
On the other hand, if the borrowersвҖҷ credit worthiness improves,
there is no direct benefit to the
investors.

C. Selling illiquid assets

Benefit

Issuer

D. Securitizing assets

Benefit

Issuer, Investors Financial Markets
вҖӢ

3

THE SECURITIZATION PROCESS
describe securitization, including the parties and the roles they play
Securitization requires that several legal and regulatory conditions are satisfied and
involves multiple parties to facilitate the transaction and ensure that these conditions
are met. This section describes a typical securitization process, the parties, and their
roles.

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
The Securitization Process

An Example of a Securitization
LetвҖҷs revisit Bright Wheel Automotive (BRWA), the hypothetical car manufacturer
introduced earlier. BRWAвҖҷs financing company subsidiary provides loans to BRWA
customers with the vehicles serving as collateral. These fixed-rate loans represent an
asset to the company with maturities averaging four years. They are fully amortizing
with the principal repaid in 48 monthly payments (12 months Г— 4 years). The borrowers make equal payments each month consisting of interest payment and principal
repayment, as shown in Exhibit 5.

Exhibit 5: Bright Wheel Automotive Securitization
Investors receive a $32.7 payment equal to the
sum of interest and principal payments

27.9 28.4 28.8 29.3 29.7 30.2 30.7 31.2 31.7 32.2

4.8

0.5

4.4

1.0

3.9

3.4

3.0

2.5

2.0

1.5

1.0

0.5

1.5

2.0

2.5

3.0

3.5

4.0

4.5

5.0

Years

Issuer receives
par value of bond
upon issuance

300
Principal

Interest

BRWAвҖҷs financing subsidiary decides whether to extend credit to customers, and it
also services the loans. Loan servicing refers to administering any aspect of a loan,
including collecting payments from borrowers, notifying borrowers who may be
delinquent, and recovering and disposing of a vehicle if the borrower does not make
the payments as scheduled. If a customer defaults, BRWA can seize the car and sell
it to recoup the remaining principal on the loan. The role of the servicer can vary: In
this example, the issuer continues to service the loan, but at other times, the servicing
may be provided by another entity.
The following is an illustration of how these loans can be securitized. In this
simplified example, the costs and fees associated with the securitization are ignored.
Exhibit 6 shows a summary of the terms for a securitization transaction where BRWA
sold car loans to a hypothetical SPE named Car Loan Trust (CLT), which then uses
the loans as collateral for ABS it issues.

449

450

Learning Module 17

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
Fixed-Income Securitization

Exhibit 6: Notes Issued by Car Loan Trust Collateralized by Car Loans вҖ“ Brief
Summary of Terms
Four-Year Asset-Backed Notes вҖ” Car Loan Trust
Issuer:

Underlying Assets/
Collateral:

Car Loan Trust (CLT), a special purpose entity.
Portfolio of loans by which new cars and vehicles are financed.

Description:

Car finance receivables originated by Bright Wheel Automotive
(BRWA), sold by BRWA to CLT, purchased by CLT, and fully
transferred from BRWA to CLT.
There are 45,000 loans in the outstanding pool, with an average
balance of EUR22,222.

Outstanding Principal
Balance of the Pool:

EUR1,000 million

Settlement Date:
Maturity Date:
Security:

Business Days:

[T + 3 Business Days]
[Four Years from Settlement Date]
The Notes are secured obligations of CLT.
Frankfurt.

Assume that BRWA wants to raise EUR1,000 million and faces two choices. One is to
issue a four-year corporate bond; the other is to issue an ABS backed by the car loans.
BRWA seeks to achieve the lowest possible interest rate relative to its benchmark
interest rate, where the difference is the credit spread.
Unlike banks and finance companies, car manufacturers are more capital-intensive.
Tying up capital on their balance sheet to finance car purchases may be a suboptimal
use of their capital. Selling off loans frees up capital and recognizes profits that can
finance the core business.
First, BRWA sets up a separate legal entity called Car Loan Trust (CLT), a special
purpose entity (SPE), sometimes also called a special purpose vehicle (SPV) or a special
purpose company, to which it sells the EUR1,000 million worth of car loans. CLT, a
legally independent and bankruptcy-remote entity from BRWA, acquires these loans
from BRWA and becomes the ultimate owner of the loans. The separate legal entity
structure ensures that if BRWA, the originator of the loans, files for bankruptcy, the
loans backing the ABS that are issued by BRWA are secure within CLT, the SPE, and
BRWAвҖҷs creditors cannot have any claim on them. Creating the required separate and
bankruptcy-remote legal structures for the SPE and fully transferring the loans from
the issuer to the SPE can be a complicated process that varies across jurisdictions.
Exhibit 7 reflects BRWAвҖҷs business: (1) selling cars financed by loans, (2) BRWA
sells to CLT EUR1,000 million worth of car loans, and (3) BRWA receives from CLT
EUR1,000 million in cash.

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
The Securitization Process

Exhibit 7: Setting up the Securitized Pool
BRWA
(Originating Firm)

1. Sale of Vehicles
Financed by Loans

3. Cash Payments
for Loans

2. Sale of Loans

Car Loan Trust (SPE)

Exhibit 8 shows how CLT then (4) issues and sells securities that are backed by the pool
of securitized loans and (5) receives cash from investors. These securities are the ABS
mentioned earlier with the EUR1,000 million in car loans representing the collateral.

Exhibit 8: Issuing the ABS
BRWA
(Originating Firm)

1. Sale of Vehicles
Financed by Loans

3. Cash Payments
for Loans

2. Sale of Loans

Car Loan Trust (SPE)

4. Issuance
and
Sale of ABS

5. Cash
Payments
for ABS

Investors

Exhibit 9 shows (6) how the monthly payments made by BRWAвҖҷs customers, which
include both interest payment and principal repayment, go to the special purpose
entity CLT, which then (7) directs the agreed periodic cash payments to the investors
in the ABS. Exhibit 9 also summarizes the full set of steps in a typical securitization.
It shows the parts played by all parties, including the company wanting to securitize
its assets, the issuer (SPE), as well as customers and investors.

451

452

Learning Module 17

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
Fixed-Income Securitization

Exhibit 9: Periodic Payments on the ABS
BRWA
(Originating Firm)

1. Sale of Vehicles
Financed by Loans

Customers

3. Cash Payments
for Loans

2. Sale of Loans

6. Periodic Cash
Payments

Car Loan Trust (SPE)

4. Issuance
and
Sale of ABS

5. Cash
Payments
for ABS

Investors

7. Periodic
Cash
Payments

Parties to a Securitization
The three main parties to a securitization are:
в– 

the seller of the collateral, sometimes called the depositor (BRWA in our
example);

в– 

the SPE that purchases the loans or receivables and uses them as collateral
to issue the ABS, CLT in our example (the SPE is often referred to as the
issuer in the prospectus because it is the entity that issues the securities);
and

в– 

the servicer of the loans (BRWAвҖҷs financing subsidiary in our example).

Other parties, such as independent accountants, lawyers/attorneys, trustees,
underwriters, rating agencies, and sometimes financial guarantors, are also involved
in these transactions. Since these parties are different from the seller of the collateral,
they are referred to as third parties to the securitization.
Besides the standard bond indenture and its covenants, two additional legal documents play an important role in the securitization process. One is the purchase
agreement between the seller of the collateral (the original lender) and the SPE, which
outlines the representations and warranties that the seller makes about the assets sold.
These representations and warranties assure investors about the quality of the assets,
an important consideration when assessing the risks associated with the ABS. The
other is the prospectus, which describes the structure of the securitization, including the priority and amount of payments to be made to the servicer, administrators,
and the ABS holders, as well as the credit enhancements used in the securitization.
A trustee or trustee agent is known as a вҖңdisinterested trusteeвҖқ and is typically a
financial institution that safeguards the assets after they have been sold to the SPE,
holds the funds due to the ABS holders until they are paid, and provides periodic

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
The Securitization Process

cash flow reports to ABS holders as agreed to in the terms of the prospectus. These
reports are the only source of information for investors to update the credit standing
of the ABS.

The Role of the SPE
The legal protection the SPE creates for the originator or issuer and the investors in
an ABS transaction plays a pivotal role in securitization. Without an SPE, securitizations would not be possible. Securitization can be a cheaper way to raise funds than
a corporate bond issue secured by the same collateral because the SPE is not affected
by the bankruptcy of the seller of the collateral.
In a securitization, the courts in most jurisdictions have no discretion to change
seniority because the bankruptcy of the originating company does not affect the SPE.
Hence removing assets from the balance sheet into an SPE is an important decoupling
of the credit risk of the entity needing funds from the SPE and the bond classes issued
by it. This explains why the SPE is structured as a bankruptcy-remote entity and why
the legal separation from the issuer and the SPE is critical.
The only credit risk that the investors face is the risk that the borrowers whose
loans are included in the SPE default on their loans. The SPEвҖҷs ability to make cash
payments to the security holders remains intact if the borrowers make the interest
payments and/or the principal repayments on their loans.
In many countries, the creditors are protected in the recognition of the securitization as a true sale, where all rights of the lender are irrevocably, unqualifiedly, and
fully transferred to the SPE according to the laws of the jurisdiction. The SPE has full
legal ownership of the securitized assets, which are de-recognized from the sellerвҖҷs
balance sheet. Note that it is possible that transfers made to bankruptcy-remote vehicles, such as an SPE, can be challenged as fraudulent transactions or conveyances in
court and if so determined, potentially unwound.
It is also important to note that not all countries have the same legal framework.
Impediments with respect to ABS issuance have arisen in some countries where the
concept of trust law is less well developed. Thus, investors should evaluate the legal
considerations that apply in the jurisdictions where they purchase ABS.
QUESTION SET
Questions 1 to 4 are based on the following example:
Ahbaling Industries (Ahbaling), a manufacturer of industrial machine
tools based in Johor, Malaysia, has SGD500 million of corporate bonds outstanding. These bonds have a credit rating below investment grade. Ahbaling
has SGD400 million of receivables on its balance sheet that it would like to
securitize. The receivables represent payments Ahbaling expects to receive for
machine tools it has sold to various customers in Europe. AhbalingвҖҷs finance
subsidiary sells the receivables to Ahbaling Trust, an SPE. Ahbaling Trust then
issues ABS, backed by the pool of receivables, with the following structure:
вҖӢ

Bond Class

Par Value (SGD millions)

A (senior)

280

B (subordinated)

60

C (subordinated)

60

Total

400
вҖӢ

453

454

Learning Module 17

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
Fixed-Income Securitization

1. Identify the correct order for the following steps related to securitizing
receivables of Ahbaling Industries:
вҖӢ

A. Investors buy securities based on their preferred level of
risk and return.
B. Ahbaling pools SGD400 million in receivables.
C. Ahbaling sells machine tools on credit.
D. ABS are issued.
E. Segregated receivables are sold to Ahbaling Trust.
вҖӢ

Solution
вҖӢ

Step 1

C. Ahbaling sells machine tools on credit.

Step 2

B. Ahbaling pools SGD400 million in receivables.

Step 3

E. Segregated receivables are sold to Ahbaling Trust.

Step 4

D. ABS are issued.

Step 5

A. Investors buy securities with their preferred level of risk
and return.
вҖӢ

2. If Ahbaling Industries issues SGD400 million in corporate bonds one year
from now:
A. the new bonds will be senior to the ABS.
B. the ABS will be senior to the new bonds.
C. seniority will not apply between the new bonds and the ABS.
Solution
The correct answer is C. Since the new bonds are issued by Ahbaling
Industries and the ABS are issued by Ahbaling Trust, two distinct entities,
seniority will not apply.
3. Investors considering the purchase of the ABS bonds will rely most on:
A. the financial health of Ahbaling Trust.
B. the financial health of Ahbaling Industries.
C. the default risk associated with collecting payments from Ahbaling
customers.
Solution
The correct answer is C. As long as AhbalingвҖҷs customers make the interest
payments and/or principal repayments on their loans, Ahbaling Trust will
be able to make cash payments to the ABS investors. The legal implication
of setting up Ahbaling Trust is that investors contemplating the purchase
of any ABS backed by the cash flows from the pool of Ahbaling receivables
will evaluate the default risk associated with collecting the payments from
the machine tool customers. The credit quality and default risk of Ahbaling
Industries are no longer directly relevant.
4. Identify the most important reason why the ABS issued by Ahbaling Trust
offers a lower interest rate than the existing Ahbaling Industries corporate
bonds outstanding.
A. Ahbaling IndustriesвҖҷ existing bonds are rated below investment grade.

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
The Securitization Process

B. Ahbaling Trust would not be affected if Ahbaling Industries files for
bankruptcy.
C. The ABS issued by Ahbaling Trust are secured by collateral, the receivables purchased from Ahbaling Industries.
Solution
The correct answer is C. A secured bond is secured by collateral and is
considered less risky than an unsecured bond without collateral backing,
and accordingly, has a lower credit spread than an unsecured bond. A is
incorrect because the credit rating on Ahbaling IndustriesвҖҷ existing bonds
does not dictate the interest rate on the ABS issued by Ahbaling Trust. B
is incorrect because even though Ahbaling Trust, as a separate legal entity,
would not be affected if Ahbaling Industries files for bankruptcy, this is not
the most important reason that the ABS require a lower interest rate.

455

456

Learning Module 17

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
Fixed-Income Securitization

PRACTICE PROBLEMS
1. Which of the following benefits of securitization is most likely to be important
for investors?
A. Increased efficiency
B. Reduced liquidity risk
C. The ability to tailor interest rate and credit risk exposures

The following information relates to questions
2-4
AR&C Limited leases private jets to corporations in North America for a fixed
term of five years. AR&C retains ownership of the jets. The corporations make
equal interest payments each month. If a customer defaults, AR&C can repossess
the jet. AR&C has been in business for approximately fifteen years and has a B3
credit rating, meaning that its debt is non-investment grade. AR&C has CAD500
million in leases on its balance sheet, which it wants to securitize into ABS.
2. Determine which of the following is the best next step for AR&C.
A. AR&C issues and sells securities backed by the pool of leases.
B. AR&C sets up a separate legal entity to which it sells the CAD500 million in
leases.
C. AR&C discontinues servicing the leases, shifting this responsibility to a
special purpose company.
3. Which shape best represents the cash payments for the Leases?
AR & C

1.

Customers

3.

2.

6.

9.

4.

5.

Investors

7.

Practice Problems

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.

A. Shape 2
B. Shape 3
C. Shape 5
4. Which of the following best describes the entity shown in shape 9?
AR & C

1.

Customers

3.

2.

6.

9.

4.

5.

7.

Investors

The entity in shape 9 is the:
A. seller of the collateral.
B. servicer of the leases.
C. SPE that purchases the leases and uses them as collateral for the ABS.
5. Which of the following statements about securitizationвҖҷs impact on economies
and financial markets is correct?
A. Securitization decreases overall liquidity in the financial system.
B. Securitization provides an alternative means of funding business operations
beyond traditional financing.
C. Securitization allows companies to directly access the financial markets and
purchase loans that will be held on their balance sheet.
6. Which of the following statements about securitization is incorrect?
A. The ABS that are created by securitization have characteristics similar to
those of equity investments.
B. Buying securitized debt helps investors increase exposure to the riskвҖ“return
characteristics of a wider range of underlying assets.
C. Securitization transactions allow issuers to create riskвҖ“return characteristics
to satisfy the risk tolerance of different investors.

457

458

Learning Module 17

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
Fixed-Income Securitization

7. In the event of a bankruptcy of the originator in a loan securitization, the investors would most likely experience:
A. gains.
B. losses.
C. no impact.
8. In a securitization, the party that purchases the loans or receivables and uses
them as collateral to issue ABS is the:
A. SPE.
B. seller.
C. servicer.

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.

Solutions

SOLUTIONS
1. The correct answer is C. Securitization provides a direct conduit between borrowers and investors. It also allows investors to tailor interest rate and credit risk
exposures to suit their specific risk, return, and maturity needs. A is incorrect
because securitization creates efficiency for issuers and financial markets more
directly than for investors. Securitization allows issuers to sell illiquid assets and
operate more efficiently on a risk-adjusted basis. Moreover, because securitization creates tradable securities with higher liquidity than the original underlying
assets, it makes financial markets more efficient. B is incorrect because securitization improves overall liquidity in the financial system and reduces liquidity
risk, which benefits participants in financial markets.
2. The correct answer is B. In order for these assets (leases) to be securitized, they
must be held in a separate legal entity structure distinct from AR&C. The separate legal entity structure ensures that if AR&C, the originator of the leases, files
for bankruptcy, the leases backing the ABS that are issued by the separate legal
entity are secure there, thus AR&CвҖҷs creditors cannot have any claim on them. A
is incorrect because if AR&C issues the securities, the leases remain on AR&CвҖҷs
balance sheet and thus could still be accessible to AR&CвҖҷs creditors in the event
of a bankruptcy. C is incorrect because servicing the leases must continue whether or not by AR&C or another entity, but servicing the leases is separate from
securitizing them.
3. The correct answer is B. As shown in the diagram below, the SPE (in rectangle
9 above), pays AR&C for the leases (as noted in shape 3 above). A is incorrect
because shape 2 above represents the sale of the leases (as shown in the diagram
below), not the payment for them, and C is incorrect because shape 5 above
represents payments from the investors for the ABS sold by the SPE (as shown in
the diagram below).
AR & C

Leasing of Jets

Customers

Cash Payments for
Leases

Sale of the Leases

Periodic Cash
Payments

Special Purpose Entity

Issuance and
Sale of ABS

Cash Payments
for ABS

Periodic Cash
Payments to
Investors

Investors

4. The correct answer is C. The SPE purchases the leases from AR&C and uses them
as collateral for the ABS, which it issues and sells to the investors. A is incorrect
because AR&C is the seller of the collateral, not the SPE. C is incorrect because

459

460

Learning Module 17

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
Fixed-Income Securitization

the diagram does not show clearly who services the leases, but it does show that
the entity in shape 9 is the SPE.
5. The correct answer is B. An important benefit of securitization is that it provides
an alternative means of funding business operations beyond traditional financing
tools, such as bonds, preferred equity, and common equity. A is incorrect because securitization improves overall liquidity in the financial system and reduces
liquidity risk. C is incorrect because securitization allows companies to directly
access the financial markets and move loans off their balance sheet.
6. The correct answer is A. The ABS that are created by pooling loans and receivables have characteristics similar to those of a standard bond. B is incorrect
because it is a correct statement. Holding securitized debt helps pension fund
investors increase exposure to the riskвҖ“return characteristics of a wider range of
underlying assets. C is incorrect because it is a correct statement. Securitization
transactions allow issuers to design riskвҖ“return characteristics to satisfy the risk
tolerance of different investors.
7. The correct answer is C. Since the SPE, which owns the loans, is bankruptcy
remote from the seller of the collateral, the bankruptcy of the seller of the collateral will not affect the holders of securities issued by the SPE and backed by the
collateral. The only credit risk that the investors face is the risk that the borrowers
whose loans are included in the SPE default on their loans.
8. The correct answer is A. The SPE is often referred to as the issuer in the prospectus because it is the entity that issues the securities to investors. B is incorrect
because the seller of the collateral, also called the depositor, is the party that originally aggregated the assets and sold them to the SPE. C is incorrect because the
servicer has an administrative function and is the entity that collects payments
from borrowers.

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.

LEARNING MODULE

18

Asset-Backed Security (ABS)
Instrument and Market Features
LEARNING OUTCOMES
Mastery

The candidate should be able to:
describe characteristics and risks of covered bonds and how they
differ from other asset-backed securities
describe typical credit enhancement structures used in
securitizations
describe types and characteristics of non-mortgage asset-backed
securities, including the cash flows and risks of each type
describe collateralized debt obligations, including their cash flows
and risks

INTRODUCTION
Prior Learning Modules have shown the funding technique of securitization can
be backed by diverse types of assets, including loans and receivables as well as residential or commercial mortgages. A unifying principle in all asset-backed security
(ABS) structures is that their underlying cash flows can be reconfigured into various
tranches, each with its particular payment pattern to investors and associated risks.
The advantage of this targeted partitioning includes a reduction in the variability of
cash flows and the reallocation of risks, such as default and early repayment across
specific tranches, with associated returns. Overall, ABS securitization provides risk
transfer, flexibility to issuers and investors, and efficiency of capital allocation.
LEARNING MODULE OVERVIEW
в– 

Covered bonds are issued by financial institutions as senior
debt obligations. Backed by a segregated pool of assets typically consisting of commercial or residential mortgages, or public
sector assets, these assets remain on the issuerвҖҷs balance sheet.

в– 

Non-mortgage ABS are securitizations that remove the pool of assets
from the original issuerвҖҷs balance sheet. They are generally collateralized by non-amortizing loans, such as credit card receivables,
that retain their original loan value during a specific period of their

1

462

Learning Module 18

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
Asset-Backed Security (ABS) Instrument and Market Features

life before the stated maturity date, known as the lockout or revolving period. During this time, principal that is repaid is reinvested to
replenish the collateral pool.
в– 

Collateralized debt obligation (CDO) is a generic term describing
securitization backed by diversified collateral pools of non-mortgage
debt (such as bonds or loans) that redistribute segmented cash flows
to investors. The CDOвҖҷs tranches receive the cash flows according to
an order of priority, with senior claims having lower bond-like payouts and junior claims receiving potentially higher but more variable
returns.

в– 

The most common CDO structure is a collateralized loan obligation
(CLO) and is subject to uniquely complex non-linear risks in cases of
collateral defaults.

в– 

Credit tranching, which involves creating distinct senior and subordinated bond classes (вҖңtranchesвҖқ), offers credit protection for the more
senior bond classes in a securitization. Senior bond classes are paid
from the underlying asset pool before subordinated tranches; subordinated bond classes absorb any cash flow losses resulting from defaults
in the asset pool before senior tranches.

в– 

Creating a set of bond classes allows investors to choose the level of
risk, expected maturity, and the associated returns they prefer. Each
bond class created in a securitization is typically rated based on both
the quality of the underlying collateral and the seniority of the class.

LEARNING MODULE SELF-ASSESSMENT
1. Which of the following types of descriptive information is typically
excluded from an ABS term sheet?
A. Conditions for early amortization
B. Market values of the tranche notes
C. Aggregate amount of collateral pool assets
Solution:
The correct answer is B. The term sheet typically provides the face value of
the tranche notes at the time of the transaction, not their market value. Both
A and C are incorrect as these items are typically included in the term sheet.
2. After the lockout period for ABS with non-amortizing collateral, how are
the cash flows for loan repayments directed?
A. All of the principal is reinvested to acquire additional loans.
B. Part of the principal is reinvested if the collateral pool is depleted.
C. No principal is reinvested, and all is distributed to different tranches.
Solution:
The correct answer is C. When the lockout period is over and the amortization period starts, any principal that is repaid will not be reinvested in new
loans but will be distributed to the different tranches.
3. The prevailing CDO structure is the:
A. CLO.

Introduction

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.

B. CMO.
C. Structured finance CDO.
Solution:
The correct answer is A. Collateralized loan obligations (CLOs) have a collateral pool composed of loans. B is incorrect because while similar, CMOs
are based on mortgages. C is incorrect because it is based on a portfolio of
other CDOs.
4. Which of the following statements about CLOs is accurate?
A. The CLO replicates the firmвҖҷs capital structure.
B. Purchases of a CLOвҖҷs collateral are funded by issuing equity.
C. A CLOвҖҷs junior tranche earns a potentially higher yield than comparable corporate bonds.
Solution:
The correct answer is A. Fundamentally, a CLO replicates the capital
structure of the firm. B is incorrect because CLO collateral purchases rely
on funds obtained from the issuance of debt. C is incorrect because it is the
senior of mezzanine tranches that earn a potentially higher yield than comparable corporate bonds.
5. Which of the following aspects of their transaction structures is most likely
shared by solar ABS, CLOs, and covered bonds?
A. A pre-funding period
B. An unstable collateral pool
C. A diversity of default exposures
Solution:
The correct answer is B. All these ABS lack a stable initial asset pool and require ongoing collateral management. A is incorrect because a pre-funding
period is used by solar ABS post transaction to acquire additional qualifying
assets that meet certain eligibility criteria. C is incorrect because covered
bonds have only one bond class with its associated default exposure in its
cover pool.
6. Which internal credit enhancement involves creating bond classes that
differ in how they share any losses resulting from defaults in the collateral
pool?
A. Subordination
B. Overcollateralization
C. Cash collateral accounts
Solution:
The correct answer is A. Subordination or credit tranching in the securitization transaction involves creating more than one bond class or tranche, and
the bond classes differ in how they share any losses resulting from defaults
in the collateral pool. B is incorrect because overcollateralization is an internal credit enhancement in which the collateral underlying the transaction is
larger than the face value of the issued bonds, so that even if defaults are in
the pool, the transaction has sufficient cushion to continue paying principal
and interest payments on the bonds. C is incorrect because it is a type of
external, not internal, credit enhancement.

463

464

Learning Module 18

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
Asset-Backed Security (ABS) Instrument and Market Features

7. Which of the following statements about covered bonds is incorrect?
A. The LTV on the mortgages included in the transactions must meet
certain standards to be eligible for inclusion in the pool.
B. Covered bond transactions typically involve collateral underlying the
transaction that is less than the face value of the issued bonds.
C. Redemption regimes exist to align the covered bondвҖҷs cash flows with
the original maturity schedule in the event of default of a covered
bondвҖҷs sponsor.
Solution:
The correct answer is B. Covered bond transactions typically involve collateral underlying the transaction, which exceeds the face value of the issued
bonds referred to as overcollateralization. A is incorrect because it is a
correct statement. The loan to value (LTV) on the mortgages included in the
transactions must meet certain standards to be eligible for inclusion in the
pool. If a mortgage fails to meet the LTV criteria, it is replaced with another
mortgage that meets the criteria. C is incorrect because it is a correct statement. Redemption regimes exist to align the covered bondвҖҷs cash flows as
closely as possible with the original maturity schedule in the event of default
of a covered bondвҖҷs financial sponsor.
8. Which of the following bonds experiences a bond default and accelerated bond payments if payments are not made according to the original
schedule?
A. Soft-bullet covered bonds
B. Hard-bullet covered bonds
C. Conditional pass-through covered bonds
Solution:
The correct answer is B. For hard-bullet covered bonds, if payments do not
occur according to the original schedule, a bond default is triggered and
bond payments are accelerated. A is incorrect because soft-bullet covered
bonds delay the bond default and payment acceleration of bond cash flows
until a new final maturity date, which is usually up to a year after the original maturity date. C is incorrect because conditional pass-through covered
bonds convert to pass-through securities after the original maturity date if
all bond payments have not been made.

2

COVERED BONDS
describe characteristics and risks of covered bonds and how they
differ from other asset-backed securities
Covered bonds, which we touched on in earlier readings, are senior debt obligations
issued by a financial institution and backed by a segregated pool of assets that typically
consist of commercial or residential mortgages, or public sector assets. Covered bonds
that are backed by ships and commercial aircraft have also been issued.

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.

Covered Bonds

The covered bond (or Pfandbrief in German) originated over 250 years ago in
Prussia and has been adopted by issuers in Europe, Asia, and Australia. Each country
or jurisdiction specifies eligible collateral and structures permissible in the covered
bond market, and the European Union is taking steps to harmonize these elements
among its member states. Exhibit 1 provides a typical structure for a covered bond
transaction.

Exhibit 1: Covered Bond Transaction Structure
Covered bonds
Covered Bond Issuer (Bank)
Assets
Cash
Loans
Other assets

Liabilities
Cover Pool

Deposits
Debt
Equity

Covered bond investors

Interest and principal
repayments

Bank ringfences certain eligible
loans to create the Cover Pool

Asset monitor

1. Claim on the Cover Pool

Reviews the Cover Pool

2. Recourse to the
unencumbered assets
of the issuer

Covered bonds are similar to ABS. However, the loans remain on the issuerвҖҷs balance
sheet and are ringfenced into a separate cover pool. The investors in the covered bonds
have dual recourse in case of bankruptcy: first on the ringfenced loans in the cover
pool that underlie the covered bond transaction, and second on the unencumbered
assets of the issuing institution.
Covered bond transactions financing environmental remediation projects and
investments in renewable energy production and infrastructure are increasingly popular.
The cover pools for these green covered bonds are largely made up of mortgages to
green buildings, which can be identified through various green building certification
standards.
Typical covered bond terms issued by Commercial Finance Partners are found
in Exhibit 2. The mortgages underlying the transaction remain on its balance sheet.

Exhibit 2: Covered Bond Term Sheet

Issuer:

Issue Size:

Tranche Size:

Interest Rate:

Settlement Date:
Maturity Date:
The Collateral:

Issue of EUR30 Million 2.00%
Prospectus Summary
Commercial Finance Partners AG
EUR30,000,000
EUR30,000,000
2.00%, payable annually on June 30.
[T + 3 Business Days]
[Twenty Years from Settlement Date]
Security in a pool of prime, fully amortizing mortgages.

465

466

Learning Module 18

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
Asset-Backed Security (ABS) Instrument and Market Features

LTV Cut-off:
Format:

80%
Soft bullet

Covered bonds usually consist of one bond class per cover pool. Another important
feature lies in the dynamic nature of the cover pool. The assets in the pool are monitored by a third party for performance and adherence to underwriting standards.
Moreover, the covered bond issuer must replace any prepaid or non-performing
assets (i.e., assets that do not generate the promised cash flows) to ensure sufficient
cash flows until the maturity of the covered bond.
Covered bonds offer two additional tools to mitigate the risks of investors. First,
covered bond transactions typically involve collateral underlying the transaction which
exceeds the face value of the issued bonds, referred to as overcollateralization. For
instance, Germany requires that all covered loan collateral pools are overcollateralized by at least 2% of the economic value of the outstanding covered bonds and some
German issuers voluntarily overcollateralize their covered bond issues. Second, the
loan to value (LTV) on the mortgages included in the transactions must meet certain
standards to be eligible for inclusion in the pool. If a mortgage fails to meet the LTV
criteria, it is replaced with another mortgage that meets the criteria.
Redemption regimes exist to align the covered bondвҖҷs cash flows as closely as
possible with the original maturity schedule in the event of default of a covered
bondвҖҷs financial sponsor. For example, in the case of hard-bullet covered bonds, if
payments do not occur according to the original schedule, a bond default is triggered
and bond payments are accelerated. Soft-bullet covered bonds delay the bond default
and payment acceleration of bond cash flows until a new final maturity date, which
is usually up to a year after the original maturity date. Conditional pass-through
covered bonds, in contrast, convert to pass-through securities after the original
maturity date if all bond payments have not yet been made.
Covered bonds have remained a relatively stable and reliable source of funding over
time because of their dual recourse nature, strict eligibility criteria, dynamic cover pool,
and redemption regimes in the event of sponsor default. As a result, covered bonds
usually carry lower credit risks and offer lower yields than otherwise similar ABS.
EXAMPLE 1

Comparing Covered Bonds and ABS at Banks
вҖңUltimately, covered bonds and ABS are complements, not substitutes. ABS
are a vehicle for packaging and selling exposure to private credit risk, with the
promise of the higher returns that holding such risk entails. Covered bonds are
a means for banks to raise long-term funding at a lower cost than if they issued
unsecured debt. The assets underlying a covered bond simply enhance the issuerвҖҷs promise to pay back the loan and are not intended to offer exposure to the
underlying pool of assets. вҖңThese differences between the two instruments are
reflected in their payment structure: ABS typically pay floating interest rates and
pass through any early payments; covered bonds typically pay a fixed interest
rate and mature on a fixed date, like any other type of bond.
вҖңAlthough there may be disadvantages to banks selling the loans that they
originate, there are also advantages. Securitization increases the financial systemвҖҷs
capacity to lend in a way that covered bonds do not. By moving loans off the
originating bankвҖҷs balance sheet, securitization reduces the amount of capital

Covered Bonds

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.

(reserves) that the bank must hold to back its loans. As a result, banks can make
more loans with the same amount of capital. Covered bonds, which keep the
loans on the banksвҖҷ balance sheets, do not offer this benefit.вҖқ
Source: Brett W. Fawley and Luciana Juvenal, вҖңComing to America: Covered Bonds?вҖқ Federal
Reserve Bank of St. Louis Economic Synopses 20 (July 2012). https://вҖӢresearchвҖӢ.stlouisfedвҖӢ.org/вҖӢ
publications/вҖӢeconomicвҖӢ-synopses/вҖӢ2012/вҖӢ07/вҖӢ27/вҖӢcomingвҖӢ-toвҖӢ-americaвҖӢ-coveredвҖӢ-bonds/вҖӢ.

QUESTION SET
1. Determine whether the following statement is true or false, and explain your reasoning.
In covered bond transactions, loans in the cover pool stay on the issuerвҖҷs
balance sheet.
Solution:

True. While covered bonds are similar to ABS, the loans composing the covered bond collateral remain on the issuerвҖҷs balance sheet and are ringfenced
into a separate cover pool.
2. Determine the correct answers to fill in the blanks: To further _______ investor risks, covered bond transactions are typically _______ to some _______
percentage of their cover poolвҖҷs economic value.
Solution:

To further reduce investor risks, covered bond transactions are typically
overcollateralized to some greater percentage of their cover poolвҖҷs economic
value.
3. Identify the covered bond type that corresponds to its correct characteristic:
i.

New form with payment lapse

ii.

Quickest triggering of defaults

iii.

New maturity date with payment lapse
вҖӢ

A. Hard-bullet
B. Soft-bullet
C. Conditional pass-through
вҖӢ

Solution:
вҖӢ

A. Hard-bullet

ii. Quickest triggering of defaults

B. Soft-bullet

iii. New maturity date with payment lapse

C. Conditional pass-through

i. New form with payment lapse
вҖӢ

A. ii is correct. With hard-bullet bonds, if payments do not occur according to the original schedule, a bond default is triggered and bond
payments are accelerated.
B. iii is correct. Soft-bullet bonds delay the bond default and payment
acceleration of bond cash flows until a new final maturity date, which
is usually up to a year after the original maturity date.

467

468

Learning Module 18

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
Asset-Backed Security (ABS) Instrument and Market Features

C. i is correct. Conditional pass-through bonds convert to pass-through
securities after the original maturity date if all bond payments have
not yet been made.
4. Which of the following statements about covered bonds is correct?
A. Covered bonds have a single recourse nature.
B. Covered bonds have lower credit risk and offer lower yields than otherwise similar ABS.
C. Covered bonds are removed from the issuerвҖҷs balance sheet and are
ringfenced into a separate cover pool.
Solution:
The correct answer is B. Covered bonds have remained a relatively stable
and reliable source of funding over time because of their dual recourse nature, strict eligibility criteria, dynamic cover pool, and redemption regimes
in the event of sponsor default. As a result, covered bonds usually carry
lower credit risks and offer lower yields than otherwise similar ABS.
A is incorrect because covered bonds have a dual recourse nature. The investors in the covered bonds have dual recourse in case of bankruptcy: first
on the ringfenced loans in the cover pool that underlie the covered bond
transaction, and second on the unencumbered assets of the issuing institution. C is incorrect because the loans remain on the issuerвҖҷs balance sheet
and are ringfenced into a separate cover pool.

3

ABS STRUCTURES TO ADDRESS CREDIT RISK
describe typical credit enhancement structures used in
securitizations
A simple securitization transaction may involve the sale of only one class of ABS: Let
us call this class Bond Class A. Returning to the Bright Wheel Automotive (BRWA)
and Car Loan Trust (CLT) hypothetical example, CLT may raise EUR1,000 million
by issuing 1,000,000 certificates for ABS Bond Class A with a par value of EUR1,000
per certificate. Thus, each certificate holder is entitled to 1/1,000,000 of the payments
from the collateral, after payment of servicing and other administrative fees. In this
case, the investors will be exposed directly to the default risk of the assets of the pool
as well as other risks that impact the payments to the pool. There are different credit
enhancement approaches the SPE can pursue to mitigate the impact of these risks
on the investors.
These are achieved by creating securitization structures with multiple classes of
ABS debt issued.

Credit Enhancement
Most securitization structures involve multiple different tranches where each of the
tranches plays a different role; often, one tranche assumes risk from other tranches.
Credit risk is a core risk that securitization structures seek to mitigate through credit

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
ABS Structures to Address Credit Risk

enhancement, a type of financial support that absorbs losses from defaults on the
underlying loans. Three main types of internal credit enhancements are widely used
in securitization transactions:
As introduced in Lesson 1 on covered bonds, overcollateralization involves a
provision that a bondвҖҷs collateral value exceeds the face value of the issued bonds.
Even if there are defaults in the pool, the transaction has sufficient cushion to continue paying principal and interest payments on the bonds. Revisiting our previous
example of the notes issued by Car Loan Trust, if the value of the loans and leases
underlying the EUR1,000 million securitization is EUR1,200 million, there is EUR200
million overcollateralization. If the car loans perform poorly, letвҖҷs say 10% default,
there is still EUR1,080 million collateral to cover losses from other defaults. This
additional cushion makes both the senior and subordinated tranches more attractive
to potential investors.
Excess spread is the difference between the coupon on the underlying collateral
and the coupon paid on the securities. For example, if the average loan in the CLT
example generates 8% but the securities issued from the pool earn 6%, then the excess
spread of 2% can absorb collateral shortfall or be used to build up reserves.
Subordination or credit tranching in the securitizationtransaction involves
creating more than one bond class or tranche, and the bond classes differ in how
they share any losses resulting from defaults in the collateral pool. The bond classes
are classified as senior bond classes or subordinated bond classes; this structure is
also referred to as a senior/subordinated structure. The subordinated bond classes
are sometimes called вҖңnon-senior bond classesвҖқ or вҖңjunior bond classes.вҖқ Since all
investors in a securitization are paid from the same underlying cash flow pool, the
tranching dictates the order of payments made to investors and the order in which
losses are absorbed by the investors.
There are also external credit enhancements, such as financial guarantees by
banks or insurance companies, letters of credit, and cash collateral accounts, which
we do not cover here.
EXAMPLE 2

Overcollateralization
In November 2013, SolarCity, a predecessor organization of Tesla Energy, issued
the first-ever US public solar ABS (SOCTY 2013-1) backed by USD54.425 million
of bundled cash payments. This ABS allowed SolarCity to access a relatively cheap
source of funding. Normal monthly payments by customers purchasing solar
power from SolarCity generated the income stream used to pay ABS investors.
The collateral comprised 5,033 photovoltaic (PV) systems located across 14
states, 143 counties, and 53 utility service territories. The bonds had a weighted
average life of 7.05 years and a BBB+ credit rating from S&P, and they provided
a 4.8% annual return to investors through 2026. The investment-grade rating
meant pension funds and other regulated investment vehicles could own the ABS.
The ABS were overcollateralized versus the face value of the bonds, which
meant that the ABS buyers received more collateral in case of default than the
USD54.425 million purchase value. This overcollateralization was one of the
reasons that the ABS received an investment-grade credit rating (BBB+ by
S&P). The overcollateralization was also significant in facilitating the offeringвҖҷs
4.8% interest rate, which was a low cost of capital for solar developers. The 4.8%
interest rate was only about 0.50% higher than the 30-year fixed-rate mortgage
at that time. Lastly, the high amount of overcollateralization was required given
that this was the first publicly known solar ABS, and investors needed to be
comfortable in purchasing a new structured finance product.

469

470

Learning Module 18

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
Asset-Backed Security (ABS) Instrument and Market Features

SolarCityвҖҷs 10-K for the fiscal year ending 31 December 2014 describes the
assets backing these securities, as follows:
In November 2013, we pooled and transferred qualifying solar energy systems and the associated customer contracts into a special purpose entity, or
SPE, and issued $54.4 million in aggregate principal of Solar Asset-backed
Notes, Series 2013-1, backed by these solar assets to certain investors. The
SPE is wholly owned by us and is consolidated in our financial statements.
Accordingly, we did not recognize a gain or loss on the transfer of these
solar assets. As of December 31, 2014, these solar assets had a carrying
value of $143.9 million and are included under solar energy systems, leased
and to be leased вҖ” net, in our consolidated balance sheets.
Thus, collateral for these ABS was worth approximately 2.7 times the value
of the ABS themselves, calculated as follows:
Total collateral USD143.9 million/Total value of ABS USD54.4 million
= 2.66 times.
Solar ABS securities such as this one can offer an attractive risk/reward profile
for fixed-income investors. The securities are typically well-structured, with high
levels of collateralization and credit enhancement, relatively low risk of default, and
an attractive spread.

Credit Tranching
Subordination functions as credit protection for the more senior bond classes; that
is, losses are realized by the subordinated bond classes before any losses are realized
by the senior bond classes. This type of protection is also commonly referred to as a
вҖңwaterfallвҖқ structure because of the cascading flow of payments between bond classes
in the event of default, as shown in Exhibit 3.

Exhibit 3: Waterfall and Capital Structure
Tranche A
Bond Investor

Asset-Backed
Security (ABS)

First to receive
principal

Tranche B
Bond Investor

Principal received
only when Tranche A
is fully repaid

Tranche C
Bond Investor

Principal received
only when Tranches
A and B are fully repaid

Tranche D
Bond Investor

Principal received
only when Tranches
A, B, and C are fully repaid

LetвҖҷs revisit the BRWA securitization from an earlier module. In this case, CLT, the
SPE, acquired the pool of car loans from BRWA. Assume that CLT then issues four
bond classes with a total par value of EUR1,000 million: Bond Class A, the senior
tranche, with a par value of EUR825 million; Bond Class B, the mezzanine tranche,
with a par value of EUR100 million; Bond Class C, the junior tranche, with a par value

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
ABS Structures to Address Credit Risk

of EUR50 million; and Bond Class D, a junior tranche that is subordinated to all the
other bond classes and has a value of EUR25 million. In this structure, the four bond
classes determine the capital structure of the securitization transaction.
In the securitization structure shown in Exhibit 4, there is a prioritization of payments that determines the timing of interest and principal cash flows to the different
tranches. The most senior investor tranche, with the highest ranking in the capital
structure, Class A, receives principal payments first, carries the lowest risk, and offers
the lowest return. The mezzanine tranche, Class B, assumes a slightly higher degree
of risk but offers higher returns. Class D absorbs losses first and has the highest risk,
with potentially the highest yield. The lowest tranche is sometimes referred to as the
вҖңequityвҖқ tranche because of the residual nature of its claims to cash flows from the
asset pool.
The four tranches carry different yields and degrees of risk, and they are impacted
differently in case of default. The specific terms and conditions are outlined in Exhibit
4. This structure is typical of securitizations.

Exhibit 4: Overview of Notes Issued by Car Loan Trust вҖ“ Brief Summary of
Terms
Four-Year Asset-Backed Notes Issued by CLT
Issuer:

Tranches:

Car Loan Trust (CLT)
Tranche A Notes
Face value:

EUR825 million

Interest rate:

MRR + 0.50%

Credit enhancement
features:

Subordination of the Class B Notes,
the Class C Notes, and the Class D
Notes

Tranche B Notes
Face value:

EUR100 million

Interest rate:

MRR + 1.50%

Credit enhancement
features:

Subordination of the Class C Notes
and the Class D Notes

Tranche C Notes
Face value:

EUR50 million

Interest rate:

MRR + 2.50%

Credit enhancement
features:

Subordination of the Class D Notes

Tranche D Notes

Status and Ranking
of Payments:

Face value:

EUR25 million

Interest rate:

Variable (higher spread than Tranche
C)

Credit enhancement
features:

None

The Class A Notes are senior to the Class B, C, & D Notes.
The Class B Notes are senior to the Class C & D Notes and junior to
the Class A Notes.
The Class C Notes are senior to the Class D Notes and junior to the
Class A & B Notes.
The Class D Notes are junior to the Class A, B, & C Notes.

471

472

Learning Module 18

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
Asset-Backed Security (ABS) Instrument and Market Features

Four-Year Asset-Backed Notes Issued by CLT
Interest Payment:

Monthly commencing 30 days from [Settlement Date] to be paid each
month, with final payment on [Maturity Date]

Seniority:

The Notes are secured obligations of CLT

Business Days:

Frankfurt

This senior/subordinated structure is an example of credit tranching. The most
junior tranche, Class D, will absorb all losses up to EUR25 million. Should the credit
losses exceed that threshold, Bond Class C will absorb all losses beyond the first
EUR25 million, up to an additional EUR50 million. Consequently, Bond Class B will
absorb losses beyond EUR75 million and up to an additional EUR100 million. Thus,
if defaults in the CLT pool do not exceed EUR175 million, Bond Class A will be fully
repaid its EUR825 million.
For example, if the total loss on the collateral in CLT is EUR70 million, then Class
D Notes absorb the first EUR25 million of losses and are wiped out, and the Class D
investors lose their investment. Then Bond Class C absorbs an additional EUR45 million of losses, and the Class C investors are repaid only the remaining EUR5 million.
However, both Bond Class A and B continue to receive payments from the pool as
agreed: They do not realize any loss in this scenario. Clearly, Bond Class A realizes a
loss only if the total loss on the collateral exceeds EUR175 million and all the more
junior tranches are wiped out.
This waterfall structure redistributes the credit risk associated with the collateral.
The creation of a set of bond classes allows investors to choose the level of risk that
they prefer to bear and receive a return accordingly. Moreover, by adjusting the features
of the various tranches, investors can pick an appropriate combination of maturity,
risk, and return characteristics.
EXAMPLE 3

Waterfall Calculation for ABS of Car Loan Trust
Similarly, if market reference rate (MRR) is 4.0%, an investor who purchased
the following ABS issued by CLT would receive the following interest payments
in the order shown.
вҖӢ

InvestorвҖҷs Initial CLT ABS Purchases

Interest Paid If No
Defaults in the CLT Pool

Interest Paid If Defaults
in the CLT Pool Are
EUR20 Million

Interest Paid If Defaults
in the CLT Pool Are EUR90
Million

Class A Notes

EUR0 million

Class B Notes

EUR3 million

EUR165 thousand

EUR165 thousand

EUR140 thousand

Class C Notes

EUR2 million

EUR130 thousand

EUR130 thousand

EUR0 thousand

EUR295 thousand

EUR295 thousand

EUR295 thousand

Class D Notes

EUR0 million

Total

EUR5 million

вҖӢ

Risk ratings are assigned to each bond class created in the securitization, and
these ratings depend on both the quality of the collateral and the seniority of
the class. The risk ratings reflect the credit risk of the pool of securitized loans
or receivables as well as the priority of how they absorb losses. In our example,
the two subordinated classes would be considered risker than the senior class
and would carry a much higher credit spread, with the Class D bonds carrying a
higher spread than the Class C bonds. Depending on the structure of the securitization, each bond class in the transaction receives a risk rating that reflects

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
ABS Structures to Address Credit Risk

473

its credit risk, and some of the bond classes may have a better credit rating
than the company that is seeking to raise funds because of collateralization or
credit enhancement.
QUESTION SET
1. Determine the correct answers to complete the following sentences:
It is common for securitizations to include a form of internal credit enhancement called ______________, also referred to as ______________. In
such a structure, there is more than one bond class, and the bond classes
differ as to how they will share any losses resulting from defaults of the borrowers whose loans are in the collateral.
Solution:

It is common for securitizations to include a form of internal credit enhancement called subordination, also referred to as credit tranching. In such
a structure, there is more than one bond class, and the bond classes differ
as to how they will share any losses resulting from defaults of the borrowers
whose loans are in the collateral.
For Questions 2 and 3, please refer to the additional information below regarding
the ABS issued by Ahbaling Trust.
вҖӢ

Bond Class

Par Value (SGD
millions)

Interest Rate

When Principal Is Repaid If
No Prepayments in the Pool

A (senior)

280

MRR + 1.0%

One year, per ABS terms

Subordination of the Class B and
the Class C Notes

B (subordinated)

60

MRR + 2.0%

Two years, per ABS terms

Subordination of the Class C Notes

C (subordinated)

60

MRR + 4.0%

Three years, per ABS terms

None

Total

400

вҖӢ

2. Calculate the value for each of the three bond classes if SGD140 million of
the securitized receivables backing the ABS default.
Solution:

вҖӢ

Bond Class

Initial Value
(SGD millions)

After Default
(SGD millions)

A (senior)

280

260

B (subordinated)

60

0

60

0

C (subordinated)
вҖӢ

The rules for the distribution of losses are as follows. All losses on the collateral are absorbed by Bond Class C before any losses are realized by Bond
Class B and then Bond Class A. Consequently, if the losses on the collateral
are SGD140 million, then the entire SGD60 million par value of Bond Class
C is lost, as is the entire SGD60 million par value of Bond Class B. Bond
Class A loses SGD20 million of its original SGD280 million par value.

Credit Enhancement Features

474

Learning Module 18

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
Asset-Backed Security (ABS) Instrument and Market Features

3. Identify the new maturity dates for the three bond classes if economic conditions worsen, driving up interest rates in year three.
Solution:

вҖӢ

Bond Class

When Principal Is Repaid If
No Prepayments in the ABS
Pool

When Principal Is Repaid
If Interest Rates Increase,
Causing Some Borrowers to
Slow Their Payments

A (senior)

One year, per ABS terms

One year, per ABS terms

B (subordinated)

Two years, per ABS terms

Two years, per ABS terms

C (subordinated)

Three years, per ABS terms

Potentially more than three
years

вҖӢ

If an increase in interest rates results in financial distress for borrowers,
some of them may slow down the speed of their payments. Since this takes
place in year three, Class A and Class B bondholders already would have
been repaid their principal. Only Class C bondholders would be impacted in
this instance.
4. Determine the correct answers to complete the following sentences:
There are three main types of internal credit enhancements that are widely
used in securitization transactions. _______________ is a provision that
the collateral underlying the transaction is larger than the face value of
the issued bonds, providing a cushion for continued payments even with
defaults in the pool. Excess spread is the difference between the coupon on
the underlying collateral and the coupon paid on the securities, which can
absorb collateral shortfall or build up reserves. With _______________ or
_______________, the securitization transaction involves creating more than
one bond class or tranche, and the bond classes differ in how they share
any losses resulting from defaults in the collateral pool. The ___________
determines the order of payments made to investors and the order losses are
absorbed by the investors.
Solution:

There are three main types of internal credit enhancements that are widely used in securitization transactions. Overcollateralization is a provision
that the collateral underlying the transaction is larger than the face value of
the issued bonds, providing a cushion for continued payments even with
defaults in the pool. Excess spread is the difference between the coupon
on the underlying collateral and the coupon paid on the securities, which
can absorb collateral shortfall or build up reserves. With subordination or
credit tranching, the securitization transaction involves creating more than
one bond class or tranche, and the bond classes differ in how they share any
losses resulting from defaults in the collateral pool. The tranching determines the order of payments made to investors, and the order losses are
absorbed by the investors.
5. Which of the following statements about credit tranching is incorrect?
A. The waterfall structure redistributes the credit risk associated with the
underlying collateral.
B. Some of the bond classes may have a better credit rating than the
company that is seeking to raise funds.

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
Non-Mortgage Asset-Backed Securities

475

C. Risk ratings are based on the market risk of the pool of securitized
loans or receivables as well as the priority of how they absorb losses.
Solution:
The correct answer is C. Risk ratings are based on the credit risk (not market risk) of the pool of securitized loans or receivables as well as the priority
of how they absorb losses.
A is incorrect because it is a correct statement. The waterfall structure redistributes the credit risk associated with the collateral. The creation of a set
of bond classes allows investors to choose the level of risk that they prefer
to bear and receive return accordingly. B is incorrect because it is a correct
statement. Each bond class in the transaction receives a risk rating that reflects its credit risk, and some of the bond classes may exhibit a better credit
rating than the company that is seeking to raise funds because of collateralization or credit enhancement.

NON-MORTGAGE ASSET-BACKED SECURITIES
describe types and characteristics of non-mortgage asset-backed
securities, including the cash flows and risks of each type
As we have seen earlier, non-mortgage assets, such as auto loans, have been used as
collateral in securitization. Securitizations can also involve credit card receivables,
personal loans, receivables, and commercial loans.
ABS can be categorized whether the collateral is amortizing or non-amortizing.
Traditional residential mortgages and auto loans are examples of amortizing loans,
where the periodic payments include both principal and interest. In amortizing ABS,
as the loans are paid off, the investors receive the scheduled principal repayments,
and any prepayments will be distributed to the bond classes based on the payment
rule. Over time as loans mature, the number of loans and their total value shrinks.
In contrast, non-amortizing loans, such as credit card debt, do not involve
scheduled principal repayments. For a non-amortizing collateral pool, the situation
is different. Over time, some of these loans will be repaid before the stated maturity
date of the ABS. If the loans are paid off during the lockout or revolving period, then
the principal repaid is reinvested to acquire additional loans with a principal equal
to the principal repaid. This reinvestment during the lockout period replenishes the
collateral pool. At the end of the lockout period, the amortization period starts, and
any principal that is repaid will not be reinvested in new loans but will be distributed
to the ABS holders.
A large variety of assets can be securitized as non-mortgage ABS. This module
focuses on a credit card receivable ABS and a residential solar ABS.

Credit Card Receivable ABS
Credit cards, issued by banks, credit card companies, retailers, and travel and entertainment companies, provide a convenient way to pay and extend credit. When a
purchase is made on a credit card, the issuer of the credit card (the lender) extends
credit to the cardholder (the borrower). The cardholder agrees to repay the amount

4

476

Learning Module 18

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
Asset-Backed Security (ABS) Instrument and Market Features

borrowed plus any applicable finance charges. From the lenderвҖҷs perspective, the
borrowed amount is a receivable. These receivables can be pooled and used as the
underlying collateral for credit card receivable ABS.
A term sheet for a typical credit card ABS can be found in Exhibit 5. In this
particular securitization, Commercial Finance Partners AG (CFP), a European bank,
pools credit card receivables denominated in CHF. Credit card issuers, such as CFP,
benefit from credit card securitization. First, it removes the credit card receivables
from their balance sheet, which provides both capital efficiency and reduces the cost
of funding. Second, it reduces the cost of default risk from credit card debt. Third, it
generates additional fee income.
This particular ABS has a 3-year revolving period when the pool uses balance
repayments to purchase new credit card receivables, and this is followed by a 6-year
amortization period.

Exhibit 5: Credit Card ABS Term Sheet Summary
Nine-Year Credit Card-Backed Notes Issued by
Commercial Finance Partners AG
Prospectus Summary
Issuer:

Issue Size:

Maturity Date:

Commercial Finance Partners AG
CHF900,000,000
[Nine Years from Settlement Date]

Revolving Period

[Starts on the Settlement Date and Ends Three Years from
Settlement Date]

Amortization Period:

[Starts Three Years and One Business Day After the
Settlement Date and Ends Nine Years from Settlement Date]

The Collateral:

Portfolio comprises credit card loan receivables originated
in, and to individuals in, Switzerland. Aggregate receivables
are CHF925 million, with an average principal balance of
CHF2,300, with a weighted average interest rate of 12%.

Tranches

Tranche A Notes
Face value:

EUR400 million

Interest rate:

7.00%

Credit enhancement features: Subordination of the Class B,
C, & D Notes
Tranche B Notes
Face value:

EUR300 million

Interest rate:

8.00%

Credit enhancement features: Subordination of the Class C
& D Notes
Tranche C Notes
Face value:

EUR150 million

Interest rate:

10.50%

Credit enhancement features: Subordination of the Class D
Notes
Tranche D Notes
Face value:

EUR50 million

Interest rate:

Variable

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
Non-Mortgage Asset-Backed Securities

Nine-Year Credit Card-Backed Notes Issued by
Commercial Finance Partners AG
Prospectus Summary
Credit enhancement features: None
Interest Payment:

Monthly commencing 30 days from [Settlement Date] to be
paid each month, with final payment on [Maturity Date]

For a pool of credit card receivables, the cash flows consist of finance charges collected,
fees, and principal repayments. Finance charges collected are the periodic interest
rate the lender charges the borrower on the unpaid balance on the credit card. That
interest rate may be fixed or floating. Typically, the floating rate is capped: There is
an upper limit of how much the lender can charge the borrower. The fees the lender
collects from the borrower include late payment fees and any annual membership fees.
As credit cards are non-amortizing loans, during the revolving periodвҖ“вҖ“in this
case the first 3 years of the structureвҖ“вҖ“the security holders receive only payments
from the finance charges and fees the lender collects. The impact of the revolving
period and the amortization period on the cash flows that noteholders receive from
ABS that securitizes receivables are depicted in Exhibit 6.

Exhibit 6: Cash Flows from a Credit Card ABS
Revolving period
Tranche A
Tranche B
Tranche C

Amortizing period

Va

Principal
repayments
reinvested

lue

of

the

co

lla

ter

al

Tranche D
Finance charges and fees

Principal (collateral) repayments, finance
charges and fees

Some provisions in credit card receivable ABS may require early principal amortization if specific events occur. Such provisions are referred to as early amortization or
rapid amortization provisions and are included to safeguard the credit quality of the
issue, particularly during the revolving period. If the repayments during the revolving
periods are not sufficient to replenish the pool, or if the defaults significantly alter the
pool, the economics of the transaction may no longer be there. This triggers a rapid
amortization clause that accelerates and alters principal cash flows. Noteholders will
receive their investments earlier, which they can then reallocate to other investments
offering more attractive risk/return characteristics. These rapid amortization clauses
can be particularly beneficial to investors during periods when there are growing
uncertainties about the macroeconomic environment.
Moreover, credit card ABS typically combine various sources of credit enhancements to support the various tranches. ABS structures normally provide credit
enhancements through subordination. For instance, in the CFP example, there are four
tranches in addition to the overcollateralization (CHF25 million), the rapid amortization provision, and other tools to support investor appetite for an appropriate risk/

477

478

Learning Module 18

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
Asset-Backed Security (ABS) Instrument and Market Features

return trade-off. In this particular case, losses from the pool have to exceed CHF75
million, or 8.33% of the face value of the ABS issue, before holders of the Tranche C
Notes are impacted by the collateral losses.
EXAMPLE 4

Contrasting Non-Mortgage ABS: Credit Card Receivable
ABS vs. Auto Loan ABS
For credit card receivable ABS, the collateral is a pool of non-amortizing loans.
During the lockout period, the cash proceeds from principal repayments are
reinvested in additional credit card receivables. During this period, there is no
prepayment risk and potential default risk is generally limited or is absorbed by
credit enhancements. When the lockout period is over, principal repayments
are used to pay off the outstanding principal on the ABS.
For auto loan-backed securities, the collateral is a pool of amortizing loans
and occasionally leases. Security holders receive regular principal repayments.
As a result, the outstanding principal balance declines over time. Additionally,
the investors in the pool are exposed to both prepayment and default risk from
the inception of the pool.
US credit card ABS ratings performed strongly through both the Global
Financial Crisis of 2008вҖ“09 (GFC) and the COVID-19 pandemic: Less than
2% of related ratings were downgraded during the GFC, and none were downgraded during the pandemicвҖҷs onset in 2020. ABS performance is supported by
the consistent quality of securitized assets and structural features that protect
against weaker performance resulting from a stressed environment.
Source: Fitch Ratings, вҖңUS Auto, Credit Card ABS Performed Well Through Crises,вҖқ Fitch Wire (7
April 2021). https://вҖӢwwwвҖӢ.fitchratingsвҖӢ.com/вҖӢresearch/вҖӢstructuredвҖӢ-finance/вҖӢusвҖӢ-autoвҖӢ-creditвҖӢ-cardвҖӢ-absвҖӢ
-performedвҖӢ-wellвҖӢ-throughвҖӢ-crisesвҖӢ-07вҖӢ-04вҖӢ-2021.

Solar ABS
With an increasing number of homeowners installing solar energy systems and other
home energy efficiency improvements, many specialty finance companies have begun
to offer specialized home improvement financing options: solar loans or solar leases.
Solar loans allow consumers to borrow the cost of purchasing and the system from an
installer. Solar leases involve renting the solar equipment directly from a solar company.
Switching to solar energy not only improves environmental sustainability, but it
also reduces overall household utility and electricity expenses. The economics are
straightforward: The utility cost savings from switching to solar energy are expected to
typically exceed the costs of investing in solar energy systems. Institutional investors
have become interested in purchasing solar ABS as these structures offer the opportunity to contribute to sustainability while generating attractive risk-adjusted yields.
Al-Shims Enterprises decides to securitize its solar energy systems loans via its
financing subsidiary using a solar ABS. The solar ABS issues EUR300 million notes
secured by 10,000 sustainable, residential, home improvement loans with a face value
of EUR320 million. The average loan balance of the home improvement loans is
EUR32,500, paying a weighted average rate of 7.5% with a weighted average maturity
of 17 years. All loans are amortizing. The net proceeds of the offering will be allocated,
in whole or in part, to the purchase and installation of residential solar energy systems,
which are eligible green projects.
From Al-ShimsвҖҷ perspective, the securitization transaction removes receivables
from its balance sheet, increases capital efficiency, and generates fee income.

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
Non-Mortgage Asset-Backed Securities

An additional feature of the solar ABS transaction is that the proceeds are directed
to financing green or environmentally friendly projects. Because solar loans facilitate
environmentally sustainable benefits through the installation of a renewable and
efficient energy source, they may qualify as green bonds. For institutional investors
looking for environmental, social, and governance (ESG) or climate finance investment
alternatives, solar ABS can offer an attractive investment alternative.
The precise legal structure of the solar ABS transaction and its collateral depend
on the jurisdiction. Normally, ABS are collateralized by the underlying debt: mortgages, loans, or receivables. The loans can be further collateralized by a lien pledged
on the installed systems, on the property itself, or both. When the solar energy system
loans are structured as residential home improvement loans, the solar ABS effectively
securitizes a subordinated (junior) mortgage on the property.
That is why solar ABS investors look for this type of debt: Usually, solar loan borrowers are prime borrowers that own their homes and have good payment records.
Additionally, solar ABS investors are typically protected through overcollateralization,
subordination, and excess spreads. Collectively, these features further reduce the
default risk in these securitizations.
Finally, many solar ABS contain a pre-funding period, which allows the trust to
acquire during a certain period of time after the close of the transaction additional
qualifying transactions that meet certain eligibility criteria.
EXAMPLE 5

Potential Investment Strengths of Solar ABS
Solar ABS can offer an attractive risk/reward profile for fixed income investors.
The securities are typically well-structured, with high levels of collateralization and credit enhancement, relatively low risk of default, and an attractive
spread. Solar ABS are collateralized by the underlying PV systems, with credit
enhancement consisting of (i) overcollateralization, (ii) subordinate bonds, (iii)
general reserve account, (iv) inverter replacement reserve account, and (v) excess
spread. Additionally, to date, all solar ABS transactions through 2019 have been
comprised of pools of consumers with weighted-average FICO consumer credit
scores above 700.a
Solar lease or loan payments often displace a consumerвҖҷs former energy
payment thus losses in this sector will likely remain low. Defaulting on a solar
loan is unlikely to reduce a consumerвҖҷs overall payment obligation as they need
to purchase energy in some form, and defaulting on a solar loan could revert
them to paying higher monthly energy expenses. While this asset class has not
been through a full credit cycle (the first solar ABS was issued in November
2013 by SolarCity), a combination of a higher credit quality consumer and the
desire for a budget-saving power source may reduce the risk of default/loss on
the underlying loan/lease payment.a
With a focus on combatting climate change, consumers and utilities are
continuing to shift away from traditional fossil fuels and are moving towards
renewable energy sources such as solar, wind, and geothermal. Unlike coal,
petroleum, and other fossil fuels, solar power contributes to a more sustainable
environment as a clean, carbon-free form of green energy. Solar ABS directly
supports a sustainable future by offering solar energy providers a term funding
source. Solar loan/lease payments primarily displace the homeownerвҖҷs former
energy bill, with the average system generally sized to provide more than 90%
of the homeвҖҷs current usage.a

479

480

Learning Module 18

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
Asset-Backed Security (ABS) Instrument and Market Features

Solar ABS may offer opportunities for institutions to accomplish dual investment goals of furthering sustainability as part of their ESG initiatives and generating incremental yield.b
a Institutional Investor, вҖңSolar ABS: A Growing Sector Offered Sunny Side UpвҖқ (17 September

2019). https://вҖӢwwwвҖӢ.iвҖӢnstitutionвҖӢalinvestorвҖӢ.com/вҖӢarticle/вҖӢb1h4mybwwjy5p7/вҖӢSolarвҖӢ-ABSвҖӢ-AвҖӢ-GrowingвҖӢ
-SectorвҖӢ-OfferedвҖӢ-SunnyвҖӢ-SideвҖӢ-Up.
b Tim Zawacki, вҖңSolar Securitizations Present Yield, ESG Play for Institutional Investors,вҖқ S&P
Global Market Intelligence (16 December 2020).https://вҖӢwwwвҖӢ.spglobalвҖӢ.com/вҖӢmarketintelligence/вҖӢen/вҖӢ
newsвҖӢ-insights/вҖӢlatestвҖӢ-newsвҖӢ-headlines/вҖӢsolarвҖӢ-securitizationsвҖӢ-presentвҖӢ-yieldвҖӢ-esgвҖӢ-playвҖӢ-forвҖӢ-institutionalвҖӢ
-investorsвҖӢ-61756315.

QUESTION SET
1. Determine the correct answers to fill in the blanks: During the
___________ of a credit card receivable ABS, the security holders receive
only ________________________________.
Solution:

During the revolving period of a credit card receivable ABS, the security
holders receive only payments from the finance charges and fees the lender
collects.
2. Describe institutional investor motivations for investing in solar ABS.
Solution:

Institutional investors have become interested in purchasing solar ABS as
these structures offer the opportunity to contribute to sustainability while
generating attractive risk-adjusted yields. Solar loans have clear environmentally sustainable benefits through the installation of renewable energy
and energy efficiency, which can make them appropriate for investors seeking ESG or climate finance investment alternatives.
3. Explain the potential investment advantage from including a pre-funding
period into the structure of a solar ABS.
Solution:

A Solar ABS that includes a pre-funding period allows its underlying trust
to acquire during a certain period of time after the close of the transaction
additional qualifying transactions that meet certain eligibility criteria for
sustainable investment. This enhances the overall environmental benefit.
In addition, there is a direct investor benefit due to diversification benefits
from a broader pool.
4. Describe a similarity of solar ABS and green covered bonds.
Solution:

Both types of securities are popular means of financing environmental
investments in infrastructure. Solar ABS have clear environmentally sustainable benefits through the installation of renewable energy and energy
efficiency. The cover pool for green covered bonds are largely made up of
mortgages to green buildings, identified through various green building
certification standards.

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
Collateralized Debt Obligations

481

5. Which of the following statements about credit card securitization is
correct?
A. Additional fee income is generated for the issuer.
B. The credit card receivables are kept on the issuerвҖҷs balance sheet.
C. The cost of default risk from credit card debt to the issuer increases.
Solution:
The correct answer is A. Credit card securitization generates additional
fee income for the issuer. B is incorrect because the credit card receivables
are removed from the issuerвҖҷs balance sheet, which provides both capital
efficiency and reduces the cost of funding. C is incorrect because the cost of
default risk from credit card debt is reduced.

5

COLLATERALIZED DEBT OBLIGATIONS
describe collateralized debt obligations, including their cash flows
and risks
Collateralized debt obligations (CDOs) issue securities backed by a diversified pool
of one or more debt obligations. CDOs can be backed by a broad range of debt. CDOs
backed by corporate and emerging market bonds are collateralized bond obligations
(CBOs); those backed by leveraged bank loans are collateralized loan obligations
(CLOs); those backed by other CDOs are structured finance CDOs; and those backed
by a portfolio of credit default swaps for other structured securities are synthetic
CDOs. The prevailing CDO structure is the CLO structure, where the collateral pool
is made up of leveraged bank loans.
Exhibit 7 summarizes features of CDOs, covered bonds, mortgage-backed securities (MBS), and non-mortgage ABS:

Exhibit 7: Overview of CDOs and Other Securitized Products
Covered Bonds

CDO

MBS

Non-Mortgage ABS

Collateral

Commercial or residential mortgages, or public
sector assets

Leveraged bank
loans (CLOs)

Commercial and residential mortgage loans

Credit card receivables
(non-amortizing) and Solar
lease/loan payments

Impact on Issuer
Balance Sheet

Collateral remains on
Collateral removed
the balance sheet and
from balance sheet
ringfenced into a separate
cover pool

Collateral removed
from balance sheet

Collateral removed from
balance sheet

Number of Bond
Classes

One bond class with its
associated default exposure in its cover pool

Typically several

Typically several

Typically several

482

Learning Module 18

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
Asset-Backed Security (ABS) Instrument and Market Features

Covered Bonds

CDO

MBS

Non-Mortgage ABS

Collateral Pool

Unstable with ongoing
collateral management

Unstable with
ongoing collateral
management

Stable

Unstable with ongoing
collateral management;
a pre-funding period
is used by solar ABS
post-transaction

Recourse

Dual recourse nature:
first on the ringfenced
loans in the cover pool
and second on the unencumbered assets of the
issuing institution

Single recourse
nature

Single recourse nature

Single recourse nature

Similar to the ABS structures discussed earlier, the CDO structures redistribute the cash
flows the underlying collateral pool generates and redistribute them to the tranches.
For the majority of CDOs, the collateral pools are not static, so there is a need for
a collateral manager that buys and sells debt obligations for and from the CDOвҖҷs
collateral pool to generate sufficient cash flows to meet the obligations to the CDO
bondholders. Otherwise, the steps and the structure of the securitization process are
largely the same. The structure of a generic CDO transaction is shown in Exhibit 8.

Exhibit 8: The Structure of a Generic CDO Transaction
Collateral Manager

Special Purpose Entity

Underlying Collateral Pool
Mortgages
Loans
Bonds
Asset-backed Securities

Assets

Liabilities

Class A Notes
Class B Notes
Collateral Pool
Class C Notes
Class D Notes

Principal, coupon, and
pre-payments, proceeds
from sales, less fees

CDO bond investors

Principal, interest, and pre-payments

The proceeds to pay the CDO bond classes can come from interest payments from
collateral assets, maturing of collateral assets, and sale of collateral assets. The basic
economics of these CDO transactions is to ensure that the return on the collateral
pool is higher than the funding costs, the aggregate cost of the bond classes issued to
finance the transaction. Holders of senior and mezzanine bonds earn fixed returns,
while the equity tranche holders and the CDO manager earn more equity-like returns.
Essentially, a CDO is a leveraged transaction, where equity tranche holders use borrowed funds (the bond classes issued) to generate a return above the funding cost.
The CDO market has changed significantly since the 2003вҖ“2007 period. The collateral today is primarily leveraged bank loans (i.e., CLOs), while during the 2003вҖ“2007
period, it consisted of a wide range of products, including different types of real estate
debt and commercial mortgage-backed securities (CMBS). While subsequent regulatory and legal changes made arranging and investing in CDOs less attractive, the
underlying securitization framework remains similar today. It can be best explored
through CLOs, collateralized by senior secured bank loans creating a diversified
portfolio of company loans.

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
Collateralized Debt Obligations

Generic CLO Structure
The capital structure of a generic CLO transaction is shown in Exhibit 9. The funds
to purchase the collateral assets for a CLO are obtained from the issuance of debt
obligations. These tranches include senior, mezzanine, and subordinated/junior/
equity tranches.
Investors in senior or mezzanine bond classes earn a potentially higher yield than
comparable corporate bonds offer, or they gain exposure to debt products that they
may not otherwise be able to acquire. Investors in equity tranches take on equity-like
risks with the potential to earn returns comparable to equities. Moreover, the residual
tranche plays a key role in whether a CLO is viable or not; the CLO structure has to
offer competitive returns for this tranche.
CLOs come in multiple flavors. These are the most common:
в– 

Cash Flow CLOs, where the cash flows from interest payments and principal repayments are redistributed across the tranches. This is the most
common CLO structure.

в– 

Market Value CLOs, where the value accruing to the tranches depends on
the market value of the portfolio.

в– 

Synthetic CLOs, where the collateral pool is created synthetically through
credit derivatives.

Exhibit 9: The Capital Structure of a Generic CLO Transaction
Highest claim on cash flows
CLO Collateral
Senior Secured
Loans
Unsecured/
Subordinated Debt
Equity

Selected for CLO
Collateral Pool

вҖў Diversified Portfolio of
senior secured loans
вҖў Value of collateral exceeds
value of CLO debt
вҖў Generally 100вҖ“225 Issuers
вҖў Actively managed by
collateral manager

AAA Tranche
CLO Capital
Structure

AA Tranche
A Tranche

CLO Debt

BBB Tranche
BB Tranche
Equity Tranche

First Loss

Lowest claim on cash flows

The ability of the manager to make the interest payments and principal repayments
depends on collateral performance. The collateral manager must continually meet
various performance tests and collateral limits for the underlying collateral. If the
manager fails pre-specified tests, a provision is triggered that requires the payoff of
the principal to the senior bond class until the tests are met. This process effectively
deleverages the CLO because the cheapest funding source for the CLO, the senior
bond class, is reduced.
A typical feature of CLO transactions is that the collateral portfolio is not finalized until after the transaction closes. While the collateral manager acquires most of
the loans before the transaction closes, there is a subsequent ramp-up period when
additional assets are added to the collateral pool. After this period, the manager may
replace loans in the portfolio as long as the new asset meets the portfolio selection
criteria. The final phase of the CLO lifecycle is when the underlying loans mature
and the collateral manager uses the proceeds to pay off the tranches according to the
order of payments. Recourse is typically limited to the collateral pool, with minimal
recourse to the original issuers.

483

484

Learning Module 18

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
Asset-Backed Security (ABS) Instrument and Market Features

The cash flow waterfall, in connection with performance-based tests, provides
varying degrees of protection to the CLOвҖҷs debt tranches. The most senior and
highest-rated AAA tranche has the lowest yield but enjoys the highest claim on the
cash flow distributions and is the most loss-remote. Mezzanine tranches pay higher
coupons but are more exposed to loss and have lower ratings. The most junior tranche,
equity, is the riskiest, is not rated, and does not have a set coupon. Instead, the equity
tranche represents a claim on all excess cash flows once the obligations for each debt
tranche have been met.
CLOs face a series of coverage tests to help ensure the cash flows generated by
the underlying bank loan collateral meet the distribution obligations in the various
CLO tranches. One such test is an overcollateralization test, which helps to keep the
principal value of a CLOвҖҷs underlying bank loan pool from exceeding the total principal
value of the notes issued by the various CLO debt tranches as long as the CLO debt
remains outstanding. If the principal value declines below the overcollateralization test
trigger value, cash will be diverted away from equity and junior CLO debt tranches
toward senior debt tranche investors.
Consider a hypothetical CLO created with USD700 million of principal promised
to the owners of its various debt tranches. To meet this USD700 million obligation,
investors and rating agencies may require that the CLO manager use the capital raised
from the CLOвҖҷs debt and equity issuance to purchase USD840 million of bank loans.
This would result in an overcollateralization ratio of 1.20.
Each CLO debt tranche has its own targeted overcollateralization ratio. The overcollateralization ratios for each tranche act as covenants and, when tripped, redirect
cash flows to purchase additional bank loan collateral or repay the senior-most CLO
debt tranche.
CLOs are also subject to a variety of other tests that act in concert in an effort to
help protect debt investors from loss. Examples of these tests include a measurement
of the industry diversification in the underlying collateral pool of bank loans and the
CLOвҖҷs exposure to non-senior secured loans. Other tests consider the diversity of
borrowers underlying each CLO and set single obligor limits. There are also limitations
on the amount of CCC-rated debt that can be included in the underlying collateral
pool, which help contain negative credit drift.
For CLO transactions, the role of the collateral manager is key. The skill the
manager displays in selecting, managing, and exchanging assets in the pool directly
impacts the performance of the CLO. In a way, the collateral manager acts as an active
bond portfolio manager by determining the asset mix and the risk and exposures in
the collateral pool.
EXAMPLE 6

CLOs and Systematic Risk
Institutional investors, such as banks, insurance companies, hedge funds, mutual
funds, and pension plans, are the primary buyers in the CLO market. Each of
these investors targets different CLO tranches. Due to regulations, many banks
almost exclusively buy the AAA-rated tranche. Other investors, such as hedge
funds and endowments, may be more speculative and thus take more risk to
earn higher returns. Current CLO structures are typically simpler than the CDO
structures that played a pivotal role in the GFC. Structured finance CDOs, which
are made up of other CDOs, are no longer common, and even synthetic CLOs
that use derivatives are less prevalent.
After the GFC, the underlying asset quality of CLOs has received more scrutiny than was previously common. This is a reflection of the need to understand
the unique characteristics of the complex asset pool in a CLO.

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
Collateralized Debt Obligations

QUESTION SET
1. Describe how a CDO is distinguished from a CMO by the function
of the CDOвҖҷs collateral manager.
Solution:

While CDOs are similar to CMOs in that both issue securities backed by
a diversified pool of one or more debt obligations, CDO collateral pools
usually are not static. Their volatility generates a need for a collateral managerthat buys and sells debt obligations for and from the CDOвҖҷs collateral
pool to generate sufficient cash flows to meet the obligations to the CDO
bondholders.
2. Identify the CLO type that corresponds to its correct characteristic:
i.

Relies on OTC contracts

ii.

Most common CLO structure

iii.

Sizes of tranches have greatest variability
вҖӢ

A. Cash flow CLO
B. Market value CLO
C. Synthetic CLO
вҖӢ

Solution:
вҖӢ

A. Cash flow CLO

ii. Most common CLO structure

B. Market value CLO

iii. Sizes of tranches have greatest
variability

C. Synthetic CLO

i. Relies on OTC contracts
вҖӢ

A. ii is correct. Cash flow CLOs are the most common CLO structure.
B. iii. is correct. For market value CLOs, the value accruing to the
tranches depends on the market value of the portfolio and thus cannot
be stated with certainty.
C. i is correct. The collateral pool of synthetic CLOs are created synthetically through credit derivatives, which are financial contracts traded
OTC.
3. Explain why a CDOвҖҷs equity tranche holders are most likely to earn the highest returns when the CDO works as designed.
Solution:

The basic economics of CDO transactions is to ensure the return on the
collateral pool is higher than the funding costs, the aggregate cost of the
bond classes issued to finance the transaction. Holders of senior and mezzanine tranches earn fixed returns, while the equity tranche holders and the
CDO manager earn more equity-like returns. The equity tranche represents
a claim on all excess cash flows once the obligations for each debt tranche
have been met, so it is the riskiest tranche and should earn the highest
return. Essentially, a CDO is a leveraged transaction, where equity tranche

485

486

Learning Module 18

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
Asset-Backed Security (ABS) Instrument and Market Features

holders use borrowed funds (the bond classes issued) to generate a return
above the funding cost.
4. Describe the effect of collateral performance test failure on a CLOвҖҷs financial
structure.
Solution:

In making interest and principal payments, a CLO collateral manager must
continually meet various performance tests and collateral limits for the
underlying collateral. Upon a test failure, a provision is triggered requiring
payoff of the principal to the senior bond class until the tests are met. This
effectively deleverages the CLO because the cheapest funding source for the
CLO, the senior bond class, is reduced.
5. In certain CLOs, the motivation is to capture a spread between the potential collateral return and the funding cost. An additional risk of this type of
securitization relative to an investment in an asset-backed security is:
A. the default risk on the collateral assets.
B. the risk that the CLO manager will fail to earn a return sufficient to
pay off the investors in the senior and the mezzanine tranches.
C. the risk due to the mismatch between the collateral making fixed-rate
payments and the bond classes making floating-rate payments.
Solution:
B is correct. In addition to the risks associated with investments in ABS,
such as the default risk on the collateral assets (answer A) and the risk due
to the potential mismatch between the collateral making fixed-rate payments and the bond classes making floating-rate payments (answer C), investors in CLOs face the risk that the CLO manager will fail to earn a return
sufficient to pay off the investors in the senior and the mezzanine tranches.
With an ABS, the cash flows from the collateral are used to pay off the
holders of the bond classes without the active management of the collateralвҖ”that is, without a manager altering the composition of the debt obligations in the pool that is backing the securitization. In contrast, in a CLO, the
manager buys and sells debt obligations with the dual purpose of not only
paying off the holders of the bond classes but also generating an attractive/
competitive return for the equity tranche and for the manager.
6. Which of the following statements about collateralized loan obligations
(CLOs) is incorrect?
A. Recourse is limited to the collateral pool, with minimal recourse to the
original issuers.
B. Investors in senior or mezzanine bond classes typically earn a lower
yield than comparable corporate bonds.
C. After the ramp-up period, the collateral manager may replace loans
in the portfolio as long as the new asset meets the portfolio selection
criteria.
Solution:
The correct answer is B. Investors in senior or mezzanine bond classes earn
a potentially higher yield than comparable corporate bonds offer. A is incorrect because it is a correct statement. Recourse is limited to the collateral
pool, with minimal recourse to the original issuers. C is incorrect because
it is a correct statement. The collateral manager acquires most of the loans

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
Collateralized Debt Obligations

before the transaction closes. In the subsequent ramp-up period, additional
assets are added to the collateral pool. After this ramp-up period, the manager may replace loans in the portfolio as long as the new asset meets the
portfolio selection criteria.

487

488

Learning Module 18

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
Asset-Backed Security (ABS) Instrument and Market Features

PRACTICE PROBLEMS
1. Which of the following statements regarding securitized products is correct?
A. Credit tranching offers credit protection for the equity tranche in a
securitization.
B. Pass-through securities are the simplest securitized structure and involve
issuers retaining the underlying assets.
C. In a true securitization, the underlying pool of assets is removed from the
balance sheet and transferred into an independent legal entity that issues
securities backed by these assets.
2. Upon a bankruptcy affecting a covered bond, the first available safeguards to
protect against potential losses are the:
A. ringfenced loans.
B. unencumbered assets of the issuer.
C. assets added by the collateral manager during ramp-up.
3. Consider the following potential reasons to explain why covered bonds usually
carry lower credit risks and offer lower yields than otherwise similar ABS:
1. Eligibility criteria
2. Dynamic cover pool
3. Redemption regime in event of sponsor default
Which of the following factors accurately explain(s) this result?
A. Reason 1 only
B. Reasons 1 and 2 only
C. Reasons 1, 2, and 3
4. Select the internal credit enhancement that seeks to improve the overall credit
quality of a risky pool of securitized loans.
A. Letters of credit
B. Overcollateralization
C. Cash collateral accounts
5. For an issuer, which of the following outcomes is most likely afteroffering a credit
card ABS?
A. Increased cost of funding
B. Increased income from fees
C. Increased cost of default risk
6. An action affecting the cash flow received by a credit card ABS holder during its

Practice Problems

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.

revolving period is the:
A. early repayment of principal by cardholders.
B. cardвҖҷs floating-rate cap exceeding the periodic rate.
C. triggering of an ABS rapid amortization provision.
7. A characteristic of solar loans that makes them attractive to potential solar ABS
investors is their:
A. universal availability to any homeowners.
B. ability to combine multiple liens to mitigate default risk.
C. flexibility in allowing either purchase or rental of solar systems.
8. Which investor tranche plays a key role in determining CLO viability?
A. Senior
B. Equity
C. Mezzanine
9. The inclusion of assets into a CLO collateral pool is completed:
A. during a subsequent ramp-up period.
B. prior to the close of the CLO transaction.
C. between ramp-up and loan maturity on meeting certain requirements.
10. When a CLO transaction experiences a collateral pool default:
A. senior tranche holders are guaranteed full repayment.
B. call features embedded in bonds likely affect junior tranches.
C. losses are distributed proportionately across all the tranches.
11. The feature of a covered bond transaction most likely shared with both CDOs and
non-mortgage ABS is its:
A. specified LTV cutoff.
B. multiple tranches for the cover pool.
C. distinct maturity and settlement dates.
12. Which of the following statements about CDOs is correct?
A. The collateral pools for CDOs are static.
B. The proceeds to pay the CDO bond classes can only come from interest
payments from collateral assets.
C. A CDO is a leveraged transaction, where equity tranche holders use borrowed funds to generate a return above the funding cost.

489

490

Learning Module 18

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
Asset-Backed Security (ABS) Instrument and Market Features

SOLUTIONS
1. The correct answer is C. In a true securitization, the specific pool of assets is
removed from the balance sheet and transferred into a separate and independent
legal entity that then issues securities backed by these pooled assets. A is incorrect because credit tranching offers credit protection for the more senior bond
classes in a securitization not the equity tranche. B is incorrect because covered
bonds, not pass-through securities, are the simplest securitization structure,
which involves the issuer retaining the underlying assets on its balance sheet.
2. The correct answer is A. In the case of bankruptcy covered bond investors, they
have dual recourse with the first safeguard being the ringfenced loans in the cover pool that underlie the covered bond transaction. B is incorrect because while
investors also have recourse to the unencumbered assets of the issuer, those serve
as a subsequent safeguard. C is incorrect because this post-transaction contribution is characteristic of the non-amortizing structure of a CDO (collateralized
debt obligation).
3. The correct answer is C. All three of the listed reasons explain this comparative
result, which has made covered bonds a relatively stable and reliable source of
funding over time.
4. The correct answer is B. Overcollateralization, one of the three main types of
internal credit enhancements used in securitization transactions, is a provision
that the collateral underlying the transaction is larger than the face value of the
issued bonds. The extra collateral provides a cushion to cover losses from defaults
in the underlying pool of collateral. A and C are incorrect because both are types
of external, not internal, credit enhancements.
5. The correct answer is B. A credit card ABS generates additional fee income. A is
incorrect because by removing the credit card debt from the balance sheet, ABS
issuance improves capital efficiency and lowers the cost of funding. C is incorrect
as the ABS also reduces the cost of default risk from credit card debt.
6. The correct answer is C. Triggering rapid amortization provisions accelerates
and alters principal cash flows. Noteholders will receive their investments earlier,
which they can then reallocate to other investments offering more attractive
risk/return characteristics. A is incorrect because typically during the revolving
period, as credit cards are non-amortizing loans, the security holders receive only
payments from the finance charges and fees the lender collects. Returned principal is reinvested in the collateral pool. B is incorrect because when floating-rate
cap exceeds the rate cardholders must pay, there is no related binding limit on
finance payments.
7. The correct answer is B. Default risk minimization adds to investment appeal,
and solar loans provide opportunities for overcollateralization. Normally, solar
ABS are collateralized by the underlying debt: mortgages, loans, or receivables.
These loans can be further collateralized by a lien pledged on the installed systems, on the property itself, or both. A is incorrect as solar loans are typically
extended only to prime borrowers who own their homes and have good payment
records. C is incorrect as the loans enable property owner purchase of installed
systems instead of rental that is transacted through solar leases.
8. The correct answer is B. Investors in equity tranches take on equity-like risks
with the potential to earn returns comparable to equities. Moreover, these

Solutions

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.

residual tranche investors play a key role in whether a CLO is viable or not; the
CLO structure has to offer competitive returns for this tranche. Facing these
risk/return possibilities puts them in the position of the marginal, price-setting
investors. A and C are incorrect because they are promised fixed returns without
reference to the underlying performance of the collateral pool. They are also
exposed to less risk in having seniority payoff preference in case of default.
9. The correct answer is C. After the ramp-up period but before underlying collateral pool loans mature, the collateral manager may replace loans in the portfolio as
long as the new asset meets the portfolio selection criteria. A is incorrect because while additional assets are added to the collateral pool during a subsequent
ramp-up period, loan replacements can still occur after the ramp-up period. B
is incorrect because a typical feature of CLO transactions is that the collateral
portfolio is not finalized until after the transaction closes.
10. The correct answer is B. A complicating factor of a default can be the call features
embedded in bonds. While exercising call options on debt would replenish the
collateral pool, distributing these proceeds to the senior and mezzanine tranches would shrink the size of the collateral pool, further narrowing the earnings
potential with junior tranches receiving the least cash flow. A is incorrect because
senior tranches are then in danger of not receiving some or any payments,
depending on the size of the default. C is incorrect because losses would first be
absorbed by junior tranche investors, with remaining losses realized by the other
tranches in order of repayment seniority.
11. The correct answer is C. As illustrated by their respective term sheets, all three
types of ABS transactions have timing milestones designating due dates for
investments (settlement date) and the end of their terms (maturity date). A is
incorrect because in contrast to their non-amortizing counterparts, covered
bonds are backed by a segregated pool of assets that typically consist of commercial or residential mortgages, for which an LTV cutoff is applicable. B is incorrect
because while other ABS often use credit tranching to create bond classes with
different borrower default exposures, covered bonds usually consist of one bond
class per cover pool.
12. The correct answer is C. A CDO is a leveraged transaction, where equity tranche
holders use borrowed funds (i.e., the bond classes issued) to generate a return
above the funding cost. A is incorrect because unlike MBS, the pools in a CDO
are not static; so, there is a need for a collateral manager that buys and sells debt
obligations for and from the CDOвҖҷs collateral pool to generate sufficient cash
flows to meet the obligations to the CDO bondholders. B is incorrect because the
proceeds to pay the CDO bond classes can come from interest payments from
collateral assets, maturing of collateral assets, and sale of collateral assets.

491

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.

LEARNING MODULE

19

Mortgage-Backed Security (MBS)
Instrument and Market Features
LEARNING OUTCOMES
Mastery

The candidate should be able to:
define prepayment risk and describe time tranching structures in
securitizations and their purpose
describe fundamental features of residential mortgage loans that are
securitized
describe types and characteristics of residential mortgage-backed
securities, including mortgage pass-through securities and
collateralized mortgage obligations, and explain the cash flows and
risks for each type
describe characteristics and risks of commercial mortgage-backed
securities

INTRODUCTION
This module builds on the prior ones that provided an overview of asset-backed securities (ABS) and described the benefits of securitization, the securitization process,
and typical securitization structures. This module focuses on the largest ABS market
in the world, mortgage-backed securities (MBS). It introduces mortgage loans and
their characteristic features; discusses residential MBS (RMBS), including mortgage pass-through securities and collateralized mortgage obligations (CMOs); and
describes commercial MBS (CMBS). It shows how to measure, mitigate, and share
securitization-related risks across different tranches and their characteristics, and it
examines MBS cash flows and risks.
LEARNING MODULE OVERVIEW
в– 

Prepayment risk is the risk that the borrower does not repay
the principal (or a portion of the principal) as scheduled.
Contraction risk occurs when the borrower repays the principal faster
than anticipated, while extension risk occurs when the borrower
repays the principal more slowly than planned.

1

494

Learning Module 19

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
Mortgage-Backed Security (MBS) Instrument and Market Features

в– 

Mortgage-backed securities (MBS) are bonds created from securitizing mortgage loans. Mortgage loans provide borrowers the funds
to purchase property and require borrowers to repay lenders on a
mutually agreed schedule, otherwise the lender has the right to seize
the property.

в– 

MBS can be created based on either residential or commercial mortgages. Bonds created from the securitization of mortgages backed
by residential properties are residential mortgage-backed securities
(RMBS).

в– 

Because both scheduled principal repayments and unscheduled prepayments are made over the life of an MBS, the contractual maturity
for an MBS does not reveal its actual payments and prepayments. The
weighted average life is a measure widely used to assess when an MBS
can be expected to be paid off.

в– 

A mortgage pass-through security is a security created when mortgage lenders pool mortgages together and use them to back securities
that they sell to investors. The cash flows of a mortgage pass-through
security depend on the monthly cash flows of the underlying pool of
mortgages.

в– 

Collateralized mortgage obligations (CMOs) securitize mortgage
pass-through securities or multiple pools of loans and are structured
to redistribute the cash flows to different bond classes or tranches,
thereby creating securities that have different exposures to prepayment risk.

в– 

The tranching structure of a CMO can redistribute prepayment risk
across the different tranches; the more senior a tranche is, the less
exposure it has to prepayment risk and default risk.

в– 

Commercial mortgage-backed securities (CMBS) can consist of just a
few underlying commercial mortgages, and so one default in a CMBS
pool may significantly impact the CMBS investors. Investors must
evaluate this unique concentration risk by analyzing the individual
loans and properties backing the CMBS, the owners of the commercial
properties themselves, as well as the CMBS structure.

в– 

Unlike RMBS, CMBS offer investors call protection at either the structural or individual loan level and thus trade more like corporate bonds
than RMBS. However, commercial mortgages often include a large
balloon payment at maturity, making CMBS more vulnerable to a type
of extension risk, balloon risk.

SELF-ASSESSMENT
1. Which of the following statements regarding the loan-to-value ratio
(LTV) is most accurate?
A. The LTV for a given mortgage remains static for the life of the loan.
B. The higher the LTV, the more protection a lender has in the event of
default.

Introduction

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.

C. LTV serves as a key measure in both residential and commercial
mortgages.
Solution:
The correct answer is C. LTV serves as a key measure both in residential
and commercial mortgages. LTV is calculated as the ratio of the amount of
the mortgage to the propertyвҖҷs value. A is incorrect because over time, the
LTV changes: As the borrower makes mortgage payments, including principal repayments, the outstanding balance on the loan is reduced and also,
fluctuations in the market value of the property cause the borrowerвҖҷs equity
to change. B is incorrect because the higher the LTV, the less protection a
lender has in the event of default.
2. Which of the following statements regarding mortgage-backed securities
(MBS) is most accurate? MBS:
A. must be backed or guaranteed by a government or a quasi-government
entity.
B. can be created by securitizing mortgages backed by residential or by
commercial properties.
C. that use credit enhancements to reduce credit risk for securities
backed by residential mortgages typically are agency RMBS.
Solution:
The correct answer is B. The mortgages in MBS can either be residential
mortgages or commercial mortgages. A is incorrect because MBS do not
have to be guaranteed by the government or a quasi-government entity. But,
when these mortgages or the securities issued backed by these mortgages
are guaranteed by the government, there is a credit support. MBS backed by
residential mortgages that are issued by private entities and not guaranteed
by a federal agency or a government-sponsored enterprise (GSE) are called
вҖңnon-agency RMBS.вҖқ C is incorrect because non-agency RMBS, not agency RMBS, typically use credit enhancements, such as insurance, letters of
credit, guarantees, or subordinated interests, to mitigate the credit risk and
improve the overall quality of the mortgage pool. These securities include
credit enhancements because they are not guaranteed or insured by a government agency or by a GSE.
3. When a mortgage is used as collateral for a mortgage pass-through security,
the mortgage is most likely said to be:
A. enhanced.
B. securitized.
C. subordinated.
Solution:
The correct answer is B. When a mortgage is used as collateral for a
mortgage pass-through security, the mortgage is said to be securitized.
A and C are incorrect because a mortgage that is used as collateral for a
mortgage pass-through security is said to be securitized, not enhanced or
subordinated.
4. Which of the following structures is created through time tranching?
A. Z-tranches
B. Floating-rate tranches

495

496

Learning Module 19

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
Mortgage-Backed Security (MBS) Instrument and Market Features

C. Principal-only (PO) securities
Solution:
The correct answer is A. Z-tranches and residual tranches are created
through time tranching, which means they do not pay interest payments
until a pre-set date. B is incorrect because floating-rate tranches carry
interest rates that are linked to an index or a market reference rate (MRR)
and are used to hedge interest rate risk in portfolios. C is incorrect because
principal-only (PO) securities pay only the principal repayments from the
pool and can be created either from mortgage pass-throughs or as a tranche
in a CMO.
5. Which of the following risks most likely explains why the maturity of an
MBS declines when interest rates decline?
A. Balloon risk
B. Extension risk
C. Contraction risk
Solution:
The correct answer is C. Contraction risk is the risk that the borrower might
pay back the money borrowed more quickly than anticipated, reducing the
amount of future payments the investor receives. When interest rates decline, actual prepayments will be higher than forecasted because homeowners will be more likely to refinance their mortgages. A is incorrect because
balloon risk occurs when the borrower fails to make the balloon payment at
the maturity of a loan with a balloon payment; it is a form of extension risk.
B is incorrect because extension risk is the risk that the borrower might pay
back the money borrowed more slowly than anticipated, extending rather
than shortening the time of repayment and the maturity of the bond.
6. Which of the following statements related to mortgage-backed securities
(MBS) is true?
A. The contractual maturity for an MBS accurately predicts future payments and prepayments.
B. A measure widely used by market participants for MBS is the weighted
average life, or simply the average life, of the MBS.
C. A 30-year, option-free corporate bond and an MBS with a 30-year
legal maturity with the same coupon rate offer equivalent interest rate
risk.
Solution:
The correct answer is B. A measure widely used by market participants for
MBS is the weighted average life, or simply the average life, of the MBS.
This measure gives investors an indication of how long they can expect to
hold the MBS before it is paid off, assuming interest rates stay at current
levels and thus expected prepayments are realized. A is incorrect because
the contractual maturity for an MBS does not reveal its actual payments and
prepayments. Unscheduled principal repayments will shorten the maturity of an MBS, but the pattern of repayments is driven by shifts in interest
rates that are not known with certainty. C is incorrect because a 30-year,
option-free corporate bond would not have the same prepayments/prepayment rates as an MBS with a 30-year legal maturity with the same coupon
rate and thus would not offer equivalent interest rate risk.

Introduction

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.

7. A major difference between residential and commercial mortgage-backed
securities is that:
A. CMBS securitize conforming mortgages and are collateralized by
homogeneous properties as compared to properties backing an RMBS.
B. investors must evaluate the individual loans and properties backing a
CMBS as well as the owners of the commercial properties themselves.
C. a CMBS pool may consist of thousands of mortgages from various
parts of a country, while an RMBS may consist of a few homogenous
residential mortgages.
Solution:
The correct answer is B. CMBS can consist of a few underlying commercial
mortgages, whereas an RMBS pool may consist of thousands of mortgages
from various parts of a country. Thus, one default in a CMBS pool may have
a significant impact on the CMBS investors. Investors in the CMBS must
consider explicitly this unique concentration risk by not only analyzing the
CMBS structure but also the individual loans and properties backing the
CMBS as well as the owners of the commercial properties themselves. A is
incorrect because RMBS, not CMBS, securitize conforming mortgages and
are collateralized by homogeneous (single-family) residential properties. C
is incorrect because an RMBS pool, not a CMBS pool, may consist of thousands of mortgages from various parts of a country, while CMBS can consist
of a few underlying commercial mortgages.
8. Which of the following statements related to the debt service coverage
(DSC) ratio, a key indicator of potential credit performance in commercial
real estate lending, is most accurate? A DSC ratio:
A. is equal to the propertyвҖҷs annual net operating income (NOI) divided
by its debt service.
B. is calculated as the ratio of the amount of the loan to the underlying
propertyвҖҷs value.
C. that exceeds 1.0 indicates that the cash flows from the property are
insufficient to cover the debt service while maintaining the property in
its initial state of repair.
Solution:
The correct answer is A. The DSC ratio is equal to the propertyвҖҷs annual
NOI divided by its debt service. NOI is defined as the rental income reduced by cash operating expenses and a replacement reserve. Debt service
is the annual amount of interest payments and principal repayments. B
is incorrect because the ratio of the amount of the loan to the underlying
propertyвҖҷs value is the LTV ratio, another key indicator of potential credit
performance, not the DSC. C is incorrect because a DSC ratio that exceeds
1.0 indicates that the cash flows from the property are sufficient, not insufficient, to cover the debt service while maintaining the property in its initial
state of repair.

497

498

Learning Module 19

2

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
Mortgage-Backed Security (MBS) Instrument and Market Features

TIME TRANCHING
define prepayment risk and describe time tranching structures in
securitizations and their purpose
ABS and MBS pass-through security cash flows are uncertain because scheduled and
actual payments frequently differ. Borrower behavior, such as the early payment of
interest and principal as well as payment delinquencies over the life of a loan, depends
upon a number of factors, including the income of the borrower (household income
or cash flows for a corporation), the terms and conditions of the loan (such as the
original interest rate versus current rates and any prepayment penalties), and the sale
of the underlying asset being financed. To correctly value these securities, investors
make certain assumptions about the predicted contractual payments after factoring
in prepayment risk. Prepayment risk is the risk that the principal or a proportion of
the principal is paid back at a different pace from the contractually agreed scheduled
payment plan by the borrower. Prepayment risk has two components: contraction risk
and extension risk, both of which reflect changes in the general level of interest rates.

Prepayment Risk
When interest rates decline, actual prepayments for fixed-rate mortgages will be higher
than forecasted because homeowners will refinance at lower interest rates. Mortgage
refinancing is particularly common in the US given the absence of loan prepayment
penalties, which are more prevalent in other countries. Thus, the maturity of an MBS
will be shorter than what was anticipated at the time of purchase. Contraction risk
is the risk that the borrower repays the principal or a portion of the principal in a
shorter period of time than the contractually agreed scheduled payment, reducing the
amount of future payments the investor receives. For investors, this has two adverse
consequences. First, investors must reinvest the proceeds at lower interest rates.
Second, the prepayment option reduces the potential price appreciation for the bond.
When interest rates increase, actual prepayments will be lower than forecasted
because homeowners will become less likely to refinance their mortgages and may even
delay new home purchases. Thus, the maturity of an MBS will be longer than what
was anticipated at the time of purchase. Extension risk is the risk that the borrower
repays the principal or a proportion of the principal in a longer time period than the
contractually agreed scheduled payment. For investors, this has adverse consequences:
Higher interest rates reduce the value of the cash flows investors receive. Therefore,
payments the investors receive will be discounted at a higher interest rate, and the
extension stretches out the payments the investors receive.
The structure of a securitization may also allow the redistribution of вҖңprepayment
riskвҖқ among bond classes. An approach for reducing this risk is to create bond classes
that possess different expected maturities. This is referred to as time tranching. For
instance, a securitization pool may contain sequential tranching, where the principal
repayments flow first to one tranche until the principal is fully repaid for that tranche
and then to the sequential tranche until the principal is repaid for that tranche.

Time Tranching

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.

EXAMPLE 1

Time Tranching with Waterfall for RLT MBS
If the Residential Loan Trust (RLT) had issued the MBS with different expected
maturities by bond class, rather than all the MBS being due in four years, the MBS
investors also could select bonds based on their expected maturity. However, the
investors could face prepayment or extension risk in this instance. The specific
maturity dates are noted in Exhibit 1.
вҖӢ

Exhibit 1: Overview of Notes Issued by Residential Loan Trust вҖ“
Brief Summary of Maturity Terms
вҖӢ

вҖӢ

Maturity of Mortgage-Backed Notes Issued by the Residential Loan Trust
Issuer:

Residential Loan Trust (RLT)

Status and Ranking of Payments

Tranches

Class A Notes rank senior to the Class
B, C, & D Notes.

Tranche A Notes

Class B Notes rank senior to Class C
& D Notes and rank junior to Class A
Notes.

Tranche B Notes

Class C Notes rank senior to the Class
D Notes and rank junior to Class A &
B Notes.

Tranche C Notes

Class D Notes will rank junior to Class
A, B, & C Notes.

Tranche D Notes

Principal Payment:

To be paid on [Maturity Date]

Seniority:

Face value: EUR825 million
Interest rate: MRR + 0.50%
Maturity: One year
Face value: EUR100 million
Interest rate: MRR + 1.50%
Maturity: Two years
Face value: EUR50 million
Interest rate: MRR + 2.50%
Maturity: Three years
Face value: EUR25 million
Interest rate: Variable
Maturity: Four years
The Notes are secured obligations of RLT.

Business Days:

Frankfurt
вҖӢ

For the investor purchasing EUR5 million across Tranche B and Tranche
C notes, loan prepayments could impact principal repayment as noted below:
вҖӢ

Timing of Principal Repaid
InvestorвҖҷs Initial RLT MBS
Purchases

When principal is repaid
if no prepayments in the
RLT collateral pool

When principal is
repaid if interest rates
decline early in year
two, thereby driving
immediate prepayments
in the RLT pool

Class A
Notes

EUR0
million

One year, per MBS terms

One year, per MBS
terms

Class B
Notes

EUR3
million

Two years, per MBS terms

Less than two years

499

500

Learning Module 19

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
Mortgage-Backed Security (MBS) Instrument and Market Features

Timing of Principal Repaid
Class C
Notes

EUR2
million

Three years, per MBS
terms

Less than three years

Class D
Notes

EUR0
million

Four years, per MBS terms Less than four years
вҖӢ

We would require additional information about the value of all prepayments and
their exact timing to identify the exact principal repayment date.
As seen in Exhibit 1, it is possible and quite common for a securitization to have
structures with both credit tranching (subordinated structures) and time tranching
(different expected maturities).
EXAMPLE 2

Volkswagen Emissions Scandal
Investors are exposed to certain types of idiosyncratic risks when buying assetbacked securities (ABS). For buyers of auto ABS, major automaker recalls
are a known risk to bond investors. In 2015, the US Securities and Exchange
Commission (SEC) accused Volkswagen (VW), one of the worldвҖҷs largest carmakers, and its CEO Martin Winterkorn with defrauding American investors during
an emissions scandal (the вҖңDieselgateвҖқ scandal). Volkswagen later admitted that
it cheated on diesel emission tests, and this admission wiped billions of euros
from the companyвҖҷs market value and led to the resignation of Winterkorn.
The emissions scandal that rocked Volkswagen also impacted ABS tied to car
loans and leases. Sales of auto ABS were booming in the years just prior to the
scandal as investors sought higher-yielding products given the low interest-rate
environment.
About USD5.6 billion worth of VW auto ABS were outstanding in 2015, with
USD4.39 billion coming from bonds backed by loans and leases. Volkswagen,
facing potential fines and litigation, found its ability to attract new business temporarily crimped, forcing down the values of the cars backing such loans. There
were USD1.25 billion worth of bonds that were backed by car dealer inventories
of VW cars, known as dealer floorplan ABS. For dealer floorplan ABS, the ABS
trust benefits from VW financing assistance, including but not limited to VWвҖҷs
pledge to repurchase unsold new vehicles and inventory. Car dealers, told to
immediately halt sales of popular 2015 and 2016 models, including Volkswagen's
Jetta and Beetle convertible, were saddled with unsalable product. Dealers had a
number of cars that they could not sell, so inventory did not turn over as rapidly.
The ABS most adversely affected by VWвҖҷs sales stoppage of certain 2015 and
2016 diesel models was the dealer floorplan securitization.
Debt investors were demanding greater compensation from Volkswagen after
the company said its emissions-cheating scandal would cost the firm more than
EUR6.5 billion. Volkswagen, a frequent issuer in EuropeвҖҷs asset-backed securities
market, said that EUR2.6 billion of loans or leases for vehicles built with engines
using cheating software were packaged into its securitizations.
Late in 2015, Volkswagen was marketing a new auto ABS with a yield premium
that was three times bigger than a similar deal earlier that year. The German
carmaker was offering to pay about 60 bps to 65 bps more than benchmark
rates for top-ranking notes of the securitization of auto leases. In comparison,
Volkswagen paid a spread of 20 bps over the one-month euro interbank offered
rate for similar debt in April 2015.

Time Tranching

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.

QUESTION SET
1. Creating bond classes that possess different expected maturities is
referred to as:
A. subordination.
B. time tranching.
C. credit tranching.
Solution:
The correct answer is B. An approach for reducing вҖңprepayment riskвҖқ or
вҖңextension riskвҖқ among bond classes is to create bond classes that possess
different expected maturities. This is referred to as time tranching. A and
C are incorrect because subordination, also commonly referred to as a
вҖңwaterfallвҖқ structure, involves directing losses to the subordinated bond
classes before the senior bond classes, not creating bond classes that possess
different expected maturities.
2. Identify which of the following statements regarding securitized products is
most accurate:
A. With time tranching, the tranches of a CMO amortize over time and
all tranches mature at the same time.
B. Pass-through securities are the simplest securitized structure and
involve issuers retaining the underlying assets.
C. In a true securitization, the underlying pool of assets is removed from
the balance sheet and transferred into an independent legal entity that
issues securities backed by these assets.
Solution:
The correct answer is C. In a true securitization, the specific pool of assets is removed from the balance sheet and transferred into a separate and
independent legal entity that then issues securities backed by these pooled
assets. A is incorrect because time tranching is an approach to reduce
prepayment or extension risk by creating bond classes that possess different
expected maturities. B is incorrect because covered bonds, not pass-through
securities, are the simplest securitization structure; they involve the issuer
retaining the underlying assets on its balance sheet.
3. Issuing the collateralized bond classes with different expected maturities is
most likely designed to mitigate:
A. credit risk.
B. default risk.
C. prepayment risk.
Solution:
The correct answer is C. Prepayment risk is the uncertainty that the cash
flows will be different from the scheduled cash flows as set forth in the lease
agreement because of the lessorsвҖҷ ability to alter payments. The creation of
bond classes with different expected maturities, referred to as time tranching, allows prepayment risk to be redistributed among bond classes. A is
incorrect because credit risk pertains to the risk of default in the assets
backing the collateralized bonds, not to the timing of payments, and B is in-

501

502

Learning Module 19

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
Mortgage-Backed Security (MBS) Instrument and Market Features

correct because default risk again pertains to the risk of default in the assets
backing the collateralized bonds.
4. Determine the correct answers to complete the following sentences:
_______ is the risk that the borrower might pay back the money borrowed
more quickly than anticipated, reducing the amount of future payments the
investor receives. _______ is the risk that the borrower might pay back the
money borrowed more slowly than anticipated, extending the time of repayment and the maturity of the bond.
Solution:

Contraction risk is the risk that the borrower might pay back the money
borrowed more quickly than anticipated, reducing the amount of future
payments the investor receives. Extension risk is the risk that the borrower
might pay back the money borrowed more slowly than anticipated, extending the time of repayment and the maturity of the bond.

3

MORTGAGE LOANS AND THEIR CHARACTERISTIC
FEATURES
describe fundamental features of residential mortgage loans that are
securitized
This lesson describes fundamental features of mortgage loans, the building block of
the largest ABS market, the mortgage-backed securities (MBS) market. MBS are
bonds created from the securitization of mortgages. A mortgage loan is secured by
the collateral of a specified real estate property that obliges the borrower to make a
predetermined series of payments to the lender. The mortgage lender has a first lien
and security interest in the property, which gives the lender the right to seize the collateral if the borrower does not pay as agreed. Upon a default on the mortgage loan,
the lender can potentially foreclose on the property. The foreclosure would allow the
lender to take possession of the property and ultimately sell the property to recover
funds toward satisfying the outstanding debt obligation.
Typically, the amount of the loan advanced to buy the property is less than the
propertyвҖҷs purchase price: The difference is the down payment. The ratio of the amount
of the mortgage to the propertyвҖҷs value is called the loan-to-value ratio (LTV). The
lower the LTV, the higher the borrowerвҖҷs equity. From the lenderвҖҷs perspective, the
higher the borrowerвҖҷs equity, the less likely the borrower is to default. Moreover, the
lower the LTV, the more protection the lender has if the borrower does default and
the lender repossesses and sells the property. When the loan is first taken out, the
borrowerвҖҷs equity in the property is equal to the down payment. Over time, the LTV
changes: As the borrower makes mortgage payments, including principal repayments,
the outstanding balance on the loan is reduced and as the market value of the property
changes, the borrowerвҖҷs equity also changes. LTV serves as a key measure both in
residential and commercial mortgages.
The capacity to sustain debt payments is another consideration. For residential
lending, the metric is the debt-to-income ratio (DTI), which compares an individualвҖҷs
monthly debt payments to their monthly pre-tax, gross income. Lenders, including

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
Mortgage Loans and Their Characteristic Features

mortgage lenders, use the DTI to measure an individualвҖҷs ability to manage monthly
payments and repay debts. A low DTI shows a balance between income and debt
and suggests that the borrower could sustain additional debt. A high DTI ratio signals that the borrower may carry too much debt for the amount of income earned
each month. Typically, lenders want to see low DTI ratios before extending loans to
a potential borrower.
EXAMPLE 3

LTV and DTI Calculation
A borrower wishes to secure a mortgage loan to purchase a house. Information
regarding the house, the desired loan, and the buyerвҖҷs finances is shown below:
в– 

House Price: EUR800,000

в– 

Desired Loan Amount: EUR600,000

в– 

Annual interest rate: 4.50%

в– 

Loan term: 20 years/240 months

в– 

BorrowerвҖҷs annual pre-tax gross income EUR141,000

The associated loan-to-value ratio (LTV) can be calculated using the desired
loan value and the anticipated house price, as shown here:
	вҖӢLTV = _
вҖӢHouse Price вҖӢ
Loan Amount

EUR 600, 000

вҖӢEUR 800, 000 вҖӢ = 75%вҖӢ.
	вҖӢLTV = _
To calculate the debt-to-income ratio (DTI), we use the monthly debt payment and the borrowerвҖҷs monthly pre-tax gross income:
вҖӢ

Month

Total Monthly Monthly Interest Monthly Principal
Payment
Payment
Payment

Remaining
Principal

1

3,795.90

2,250.00

1,545.90

598,454.10

2

3,795.90

2,244.20

1,551.69

596,902.41

3

3,795.90

2,238.38

1,557.51

595,344.90

4

3,795.90

2,232.54

1,563.35

593,781.55

5

3,795.90

2,226.68

1,569.22

592,212.33

236

3,795.90

70.38

3,725.52

15,042.30

237

3,795.90

56.41

3,739.49

11,302.81

238

3,795.90

42.39

3,753.51

7,549.30

239

3,795.90

28.31

3,767.59

3,781.71

240

3,795.90

14.18

3,781.71

(0.00)

вҖӢ

We calculate the monthly debt payment, with the first five and final five
monthly payments of the 20-year mortgage. Putting the borrowerвҖҷs monthly
pre-tax gross income and the monthly mortgage payment into the DTI formula
provides the following DTI ratio:
Monthly Debt Payment

	вҖӢDTI = _______________________
вҖӢвҖҜвҖҜ
вҖҜвҖҜвҖҜ
Monthly
pre вҲ’ tax gross income вҖӢ
EUR 3, 795.90

вҖҜвҖҜвҖӢ= 32.31%вҖӢ.
	вҖӢDTI = ______________
вҖӢвҖҜвҖҜ
вҖӢ(EUR 141, 000 / 12)вҖӢ

503

504

Learning Module 19

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
Mortgage-Backed Security (MBS) Instrument and Market Features

In the United States, market participants typically identify two types of mortgages
based on the credit quality of the borrower: prime loans and subprime loans. Prime
loans have borrowers of high credit quality with strong employment and credit histories, a low DTI, substantial equity in the underlying property, and a first lien on
the mortgaged property serving as the collateral for the loan. Subprime loans have
borrowers with lower credit quality, high DTI, and/or are loans with higher LTV, and
include loans that are secured by second liens otherwise subordinated to other loans.

Agency and Non-Agency RMBS
The mortgages in MBS can either be residential mortgages or commercial mortgages.
The bonds created from the securitization of mortgages backed by residential properties are residential mortgage-backed securities (RMBS).
In the United States, Canada, Japan, and South Korea, there is a distinction between
RMBS that are guaranteed by the government or a quasi-government entity and
RMBS that are not. In the United States, securities backed by residential mortgages
are divided into three sectors:
1. Guaranteed by a federal agency;
2. Guaranteed by government-sponsored enterprises (GSEs); and
3. Issued by private entities and thus not guaranteed by a federal agency or a
GSE.
The first two sectors are referred to as agency RMBS, and the third sector is
referred to as non-agency RMBS. Agency RMBS include securities issued by government agencies. These RMBS carry the full faith and credit of the government,
essentially a guarantee with respect to timely payment of interest and repayment of
principal. Agency RMBS also include RMBS issued by GSEs. RMBS issued by GSEs do
not carry the full faith and credit of the government, but rather the GSEsвҖҷ guarantee
of the timely payment of interest and principal for the securities. The GSEвҖҷs charge a
fee for this guarantee.
Due to changing regulatory guidance and increased scrutiny, non-agency-RMBS
all but disappeared after the global financial crisis. They were issued by banks, financial institutions, and other private businesses and were not beneficiaries of government guarantees. These private pass-throughs or private label MBS gained credit
enhancement through pool insurance, letters of credit, guarantees, or subordination.
Non-agency RMBS securitized mortgages were collateralized by non-conforming
mortgages, or by subprime, highly risky mortgages. Some residential home improvement loans, such as solar ABS discussed in an earlier lesson, that are subordinated to
primary mortgage liens are now securitized in increasing volume.

Mortgage Contingency Features
Mortgages contain certain features that give the borrower and the lender certain rights
throughout the contract. The most important right a borrower has is the option to
prepay a mortgage by making any payment on the principal that exceeds the scheduled principal repayment. The prepayment option or an early repayment option
may entitle the borrower to prepay all or part of the outstanding mortgage principal
prior to maturity. This creates a risk from the lenderвҖҷs or investorвҖҷs viewpoint: the
cash flow amounts and timing cannot be known with certainty. This prepayment risk
affects all mortgages that allow prepayment, not only the level-payment, fixed-rate,
fully amortizing mortgages.

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
Mortgage Loans and Their Characteristic Features

Lenders reduce this risk by stipulating a monetary penalty for prepayment that
compensates the lender for the difference between the contract rate and the prevailing
mortgage rate if the borrower prepays when interest rates decline. It is an effective
mechanism that provides some certainty for the lender and reduces the incentive to
prepay a mortgage. Prepayment penalty mortgages are quite common in Europe, while
in the United States few mortgages have prepayment penalties.
When the borrower fails to make the contractual loan payments as stipulated in
the note and loan documents, it may trigger a default on the mortgage loan that would
allow the lender to potentially foreclose on the property and sell it. But the proceeds
received from the sale of the property may be insufficient to recoup the losses. In a
recourse loan, the lender has a claim against the borrower for the shortfall (deficiency)
between the amount of the outstanding mortgage balance and the proceeds received
from the sale of the property. In a non-recourse loan, the lender does not have such
a claim against the borrower and thus can look only to the property to recover the
outstanding mortgage balance. In the United States, recourse is typically determined
by the state, and residential mortgages are non-recourse loans in many states. In
contrast, residential mortgages in most European countries are recourse loans.
The recourse/non-recourse feature of a mortgage has implications for projecting
the likelihood of defaults by borrowers, particularly for mortgages where the LTV
exceeds 100%вҖ”sometimes referred to as вҖңunderwater mortgages.вҖқ
EXAMPLE 4

Underwater Mortgages during the 2008вҖ“09 Global
Financial Crisis
A mortgage is said to be in negative equity, or вҖңunderwater,вҖқ when a home is valued for less than the amount their owners owe the banks holding their mortgage
loans. Being underwater is typically a precursor to foreclosure.
The most extreme example of widespread underwater mortgages occurred
during the Global Financial Crisis of 2008вҖ“09 (GFC). At the end of 2009, almost
10.7 million, or 23% of, US residential properties were underwater. An additional
2.3 million mortgages were approaching negative equity, meaning they had less
than 5% equity.
This phenomenon existed primarily because of loose credit underwriting
standards and inflated home prices from 2004вҖ“06, followed by declining home
prices and high leverage on non-recourse mortgage loans provided by banks
and other debt capital providers.
The distribution of negative equity was heavily concentrated in five states:
Nevada (65%), followed by Arizona (48%), Florida (45%), Michigan (37%), and
California (35%). Among the top five states, the average negative equity share
was 40%, compared to 14% for the remaining states.
The rise in negative equity is closely tied to increases in pre-foreclosure
activity. At one end of the spectrum, borrowers with equity tend to have very
low default rates. At the other end, investors tend to more commonly default on
their mortgages once in negative equity, as their default rate is typically 2% to 3%
higher than owner-occupied homes with similar degrees of negative equity. For
the highest level of negative equity, investors and owners behave very similarly
and default at similar rates. Strategic default on the part of the owner occupier
becomes more likely at such high levels of negative equity, especially when the
mortgage loan is non-recourse.

505

506

Learning Module 19

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
Mortgage-Backed Security (MBS) Instrument and Market Features

If the mortgage is non-recourse, the borrower may have an incentive to strategically default on an underwater mortgage and allow the lender to foreclose on the
property, even if the borrower has resources available to continue to make mortgage
payments. Although there are negative consequences to a вҖңstrategic default,вҖқ such as
lower credit scores and a reduced ability to borrow in the future, some borrowers may
make use of this approach. Where mortgages are recourse loans, a strategic default
is less likely because the lender can recover the shortfall from the borrowerвҖҷs other
assets and/or income.
QUESTION SET
1. Determine the correct answers to complete the following sentences:
___________ are bonds created from the securitization of mortgages. A
____________ is secured by the collateral of some specified real estate property that obliges the borrower to make a predetermined series of payments
to the lender.
Solution:

MBS are bonds created from the securitization of mortgages. A mortgage
loan is secured by the collateral of some specified real estate property that
obliges the borrower to make a predetermined series of payments to the
lender.
2. A borrower procures a JPY33,165,000 loan for a JPY36,850,000 house in Tokyo. Calculate the LTV for this transaction and explain why the lender uses
this measure.
Solution:

The LTV (loan-to-value ratio) is the ratio of the amount of the mortgage to
the propertyвҖҷs value.
Amount of the mortgage

	вҖӢ LTV = __________________
вҖӢвҖҜвҖҜ
вҖҜвҖҜ
вҖӢ
Property's value
33, 165, 000

	вҖӢLTV = _
вҖӢ36, 850, 000 вҖӢ
	вҖӢLTV = 90.0%вҖӢ.
The lender uses the LTV ratio to assess the likelihood that a borrower will
default. The lower the LTV, the higher a borrowerвҖҷs equity. The higher the
borrowerвҖҷs equity, the less likely a default.
3. Identify the mortgage feature below that corresponds to its description.
(Matching)
вҖӢ

1. Maturity

A. The contract or note rate

2. Mortgage Interest Rate

B. The right of a borrower to pay more
than the scheduled principal required

3. Amortization

C. The rights of a lender when the
borrower fails to make required loan
payments

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
Residential Mortgage-Backed Securities (RMBS)

4. Right to Prepay

D. The typical term

5. Rights in a Foreclosure

E. The set schedule for repayment of the
mortgage

507

вҖӢ

Solution:
1. D is correct. Maturity is the typical term or number of years to maturity of a mortgage.
2. A is correct. The interest rate on a mortgage is called the mortgage
rate, contract rate, or note rate, and it varies among countries.
3. E is correct. Amortization pertains to the pace at which the balance of
a loan is gradually reduced over time according to a set schedule.
4. B is correct. A prepayment option (or early repayment option) may
entitle the borrower to prepay all or part of a mortgageвҖҷs outstanding
principal prior to maturity.
5. C is correct. When a borrower fails to make the contractual loan payments, the lenderвҖҷs rights in a foreclosure allow foreclosure and sale of
the property.
4. A real estate investor has obtained a recourse mortgage loan on a shopping
center from a bank. The loan has an outstanding balance of USD7,000,000,
while the property is valued at only USD5,000,000. In the event of a default
on the loan, the bank has a claim on:
A. the property.
B. the borrowerвҖҷs personal assets.
C. both the property and the borrowerвҖҷs personal assets.
Solution:
The correct answer is C. In a recourse loan, the lender has a claim against
the borrower for the shortfall (deficiency) between the amount of the outstanding mortgage balance and the proceeds received from the sale of the
property. A is incorrect because in a non-recourse loan, the lender has a
claim against only the property for any shortfall between the amount of the
outstanding mortgage balance and the proceeds received from the sale of
the property. B is incorrect because mortgage lending entails a first lien and
security interest in the property, which is the lenderвҖҷs collateral.

RESIDENTIAL MORTGAGE-BACKED SECURITIES
(RMBS)
describe types and characteristics of residential mortgage-backed
securities, including mortgage pass-through securities and
collateralized mortgage obligations, and explain the cash flows and
risks for each type
This section starts with a discussion of different RMBS types, to continue with an
overview of mortgage pass-through securities and non-agency RMBS. It concludes
with collateralized mortgage obligations.

4

508

Learning Module 19

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
Mortgage-Backed Security (MBS) Instrument and Market Features

A mortgage pass-through security is a security created when mortgage lenders
pool mortgages together and sell securities to investors. The cash flow from the mortgage poolвҖ“вҖ“monthly payments of principal, interest, and prepaymentsвҖ“вҖ“are вҖңpassed
throughвҖқ to the security holders. A pool can consist of several thousand or only a
few mortgages. When a mortgage is used as collateral for a mortgage pass-through
security, the mortgage is said to be securitized.

Mortgage Pass-Through Securities
The cash flows of a mortgage pass-through security depend on the monthly cash flows
of the underlying pool of mortgages. The amount and the timing of the cash flows
from the pool of mortgages cover both the cash flow passed through to the security
holders and administrative charges for servicing the pool; the structure is depicted
in Exhibit 2.

Exhibit 2: Mortgage Pass-Through

Special Purpose Entity
Principal, interest, and
pre-payments

Assets

Liabilities

Mortgages
WAC = 4.55%

RMBS
Pass through rate
= 4.00%

Principal, coupon, and
pre-payments less fees

Servicing fees = 0.55%

Note: WAC = weighted average coupon rate.

These administrative charges include collecting monthly payments from borrowers,
forwarding proceeds to owners of the loan, sending payment notices to borrowers,
maintaining records of the outstanding mortgage balance, initiating foreclosure proceedings if necessary, and providing tax information to borrowers when applicable.
Additionally, the issuer or financial guarantor of the mortgage pass-through security
may charge fees for guaranteeing the issue. All these fees are typically calculated as
a portion of the mortgage rate.
A comparison of MBS and RMBS can be found in Exhibit 3.

Exhibit 3: Comparison of MBS and RMBS
Mortgage-Backed
Securities (MBS)

Residential Mortgage-Backed Securities
(RMBS)

Underlying
collateral

Residential or commercial
mortgages

Residential mortgages and/or mortgage
pass-through securities

Subtype

в– 

RMBS

в– 

Mortgage pass-through securities

в– 

CMBS

в– 

Collateralized mortgage obligations
(CMOs), including sequential pay,
planned amortization class (PAC), and
support tranches

в– 

Agency RMBS

в– 

Non-Agency RMBS

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
Residential Mortgage-Backed Securities (RMBS)

A mortgage pass-through securityвҖҷs coupon rate is called the pass-through rate and
is lower than the weighted average mortgage rate earned on the underlying pool of
mortgages because of administrative charges. The pass-through rate that the investor
receives is said to be вҖңnet interestвҖқ or вҖңnet coupon.вҖқ
The mortgages in a securitization pool are heterogeneous: outstanding principal,
interest rates, and maturities vary across the mortgages. Consequently, for each mortgage pass-through security, a weighted average coupon rate (WAC) and a weighted
average maturity (WAM) are determined. The WAC is calculated by weighting the
mortgage rate of each mortgage in the pool by the percentage of the outstanding
mortgage balance relative to the outstanding amount of all the mortgages in the pool.
Similarly, the WAM is calculated by weighting the remaining number of months to
maturity of each mortgage in the pool by the outstanding mortgage balance relative
to the outstanding amount of all the mortgages in the pool.
Exhibit 4 shows the five mortgages underlying a specific mortgage-backed security.

Exhibit 4: Weighted Average Coupon Rate and Weighted Average Maturity
Number of
Months to
Maturity
(MM)

Mortgage
A

2.50%

EUR300,000

EUR238,000

240

180

3.30%

EUR420,000

EUR380,000

600

480

2.80%

EUR100,000

EUR87,000

288

240

4.00%

EUR280,000

EUR132,000

360

120

3.70%

EUR350,000

EUR312,000

384

312

EUR1,450,000

EUR1,149,000

B

C

D
E

Beginning
Balance
(BB)

Original
Term
(months)

Interest
rate
(i)

Current
Balance
(CB)

The weighted average coupon rate for this MBS is calculated as follows:

(вҖӢвҲ‘ CBвҖӢ)

(вҖӢвҲ‘ CBвҖӢ)

C вҖӢBвҖӢ вҖӢ

C вҖӢBвҖӢ вҖӢ

(вҖӢвҲ‘ CBвҖӢ)
C вҖӢBC
вҖӢвҖӢ

(вҖӢвҲ‘ CBвҖӢ)

(вҖӢвҲ‘ CBвҖӢ)

C вҖӢBвҖӢ вҖӢ

C вҖӢBвҖӢ вҖӢ

	вҖӢWAC = вҖӢiAвҖӢ вҖӢ _
вҖӢ A вҖӢ вҖӢ+ вҖӢiBвҖӢ вҖӢ _
вҖӢ B вҖӢ вҖӢ+ вҖӢiC
вҖӢвҖӢ _
вҖӢ
вҖӢ вҖӢ+ вҖӢiD
вҖӢвҖӢ _
вҖӢ D вҖӢ вҖӢ+ вҖӢiEвҖӢ вҖӢ _
вҖӢ EвҖӢ вҖӢ
вҖӢ1, 149, 000 вҖӢ)вҖӢ+ 3.30%вҖӢ(_
вҖӢ1, 149, 000 вҖӢ)вҖӢ+ 2.80%вҖӢ(_
вҖӢ1, 149, 000 вҖӢ)вҖӢ
WAC = 2.50%вҖӢ(_
	вҖӢвҖҜвҖҜвҖҜвҖҜвҖҜвҖҜвҖӢвҖӢ
132, 000
312, 000
+ 4.00%вҖӢ(_
вҖӢ1, 149, 000 вҖӢ)вҖӢ+ 3.70%вҖӢ(_
вҖӢ1, 149, 000 вҖӢ)вҖӢ
238, 000

380, 000

87, 000

WAC = 3.29%.
The weighted average maturity for this MBS is calculated as follows:

(вҖӢвҲ‘ CBвҖӢ)
C вҖӢBвҖӢ вҖӢ

(вҖӢвҲ‘ CBвҖӢ)
C вҖӢBвҖӢ вҖӢ

(вҖӢвҲ‘ CBвҖӢ)
C вҖӢBC
вҖӢвҖӢ

вҖӢ A вҖӢ вҖӢ+ M вҖӢMBвҖӢ вҖӢ _
вҖӢ B вҖӢ вҖӢ+ M вҖӢMC
вҖӢвҖӢ _
вҖӢ
вҖӢ вҖӢ
WAM = M вҖӢMAвҖӢ вҖӢ _
вҖҜвҖҜвҖҜвҖҜвҖҜвҖӢ вҖӢ
	вҖӢ
C вҖӢBвҖӢ вҖӢ
C вҖӢBвҖӢ вҖӢ
+ M вҖӢMD
вҖӢвҖӢ _
вҖӢ D вҖӢ вҖӢ+ M вҖӢMEвҖӢ вҖӢ _
вҖӢ EвҖӢ вҖӢ

(вҖӢвҲ‘ CBвҖӢ)

(вҖӢвҲ‘ CBвҖӢ)

WAM = 180вҖӢ(_
вҖӢ1, 149, 000 вҖӢ)вҖӢ+ 480вҖӢ(_
вҖӢ1, 149, 000 вҖӢ)вҖӢ+ 240вҖӢ(_
вҖӢ1, 149, 000 вҖӢ)вҖӢ
	вҖӢвҖҜвҖҜвҖҜвҖҜвҖҜвҖҜвҖӢвҖӢ
132, 000
312, 000
+ 120вҖӢ(_
вҖӢ1, 149, 000 вҖӢ)вҖӢ+ 312вҖӢ(_
вҖӢ1, 149, 000 вҖӢ)вҖӢmonth
238, 000

WAM =313 months.

380, 000

87, 000

509

510

Learning Module 19

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
Mortgage-Backed Security (MBS) Instrument and Market Features

Collateralized Mortgage Obligations (CMOs)
Collateralized mortgage obligations securitize mortgage pass-through securities
or multiple pools of loans. CMOs are structured to redistribute the cash flows to different bond classes or tranches and create securities that have different exposures to
prepayment risk. Exhibit 5 depicts a simplified CMO structure where the cash flows
are pooled and redistributed across the different tranches.

Exhibit 5: Collateralized Mortgage Obligation (CMO)
Pass-Through SPE 1
Principal, interest, and
pre-payments

Assets

Liabilities

Mortgages

RMBS 1
pass-throughs

Principal, coupon, and
pre-payments less fees

Mortgage
Passthrough
RMBS 1 and 2

Pass-Through SPE 2
Principal, interest, and
pre-payments

Assets

Liabilities

Mortgages

RMBS 2
pass-throughs

CMO SPE 3
Assets

Principal, coupon, and
pre-payments less fees

Liabilities
CMO
Tranche A
Tranche B
Tranche C
Tranche D
Tranche E
Tranche F

Principal, coupon,
and pre-payments
less fees

Principal, interest, and pre-payments

The tranching structure in the CMOs cannot eliminate prepayment risk, but it can
redistribute the prepayment risk across the different tranches, insulating some tranches
more than others. The CMO tranche structures reduce the uncertainties of the size
and timing of payments investors receive. The features of these tranches are designed
to specifically meet the various needs of institutional investors. Across the range of
CMO structures, the more senior a tranche is, the less exposure it has to prepayment
risk and default risk.
Sequential-Pay CMO
In sequential-pay CMO structures, each tranche would be retired sequentially. This is
an example of time tranching. One class begins to receive principal payments from the
underlying securities only after the principal on any previous class has been completely
paid off and retired. All principal payments are made to Tranche A until the principal
balance for Tranche A is zero. After Tranche A is paid off, the principal payments go
to Tranche B until the principal balance for Tranche B is zero. This continues until
all the tranches are repaid.
To illustrate a sequential-pay CMO, let us use a hypothetical transaction with
the terms outlined above. The collateral for this CMO is the mortgage pass-through
security described in Exhibit 2, where the total par value of the collateral is USD100
million, the pass-through coupon rate is 4%, the WAC is 4.55%, and the WAM is 360
months (about 30 years). From this collateral, three tranches are created, as shown in
Exhibit 6. The coupon rate varies with the differences in maturity and reflects the term
structure of interest rates, among other factors. Exhibit 6 shows the resulting structure.

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
Residential Mortgage-Backed Securities (RMBS)

Exhibit 6: Sequential-Pay CMO
Special Purpose Entity
Assets

Liabilities

0вҖ“5 years

6вҖ“15 years

16вҖ“30 years

CMO
Tranche A
$50m, 3.75%
Mortgages
RMBS

Principal + interest

Tranche B
$30m, 3.95%

Interest

Principal and interest

Tranche C
$20m, 4.05%

Interest

Interest

Principal and interest

Some protection against prepayment risk is provided for each tranche. The protection
arises because prioritizing the distribution of principal (that is, establishing the payment
rule for the principal repayment) effectively protects the shorter-term tranche (A in
this structure) against extension risk. This protection comes from the longer-term
tranches B and C. At the same time, Tranches B and C benefit because they are provided protection against contraction risk from Tranche A. Thus, the sequential-pay
CMO structure allows investors concerned about extension risk to invest in Tranche
A, and those concerned about contraction risk to invest in Tranches B and C.
Although the payment rules for the distribution of the principal repayments are
known, the actual principal repayment amount in each month is not, as it depends
on the actual prepayment rate of the collateral. In the sequential-pay CMO structure,
the tranches have average lives that are shorter or longer than the collateral, thereby
attracting investors who have preferences for different average lives. A pension fund
that expects a significant increase in the number of retirements after several years
may opt for a tranche with a longer average life, such as Tranche B. An endowment
that looks to finance large building projects over the next few years may choose a
tranche with lower average life, such as Tranche A. And long-term investors willing
to assume more risk may select Tranche C.
KNOWLEDGE CHECK
1. Referring to the sequential-pay CMO in Exhibit 6, match each
investor type to the tranche that most closely fits its needs.
Investor Types:
a. A pension fund looking for higher returns in exchange for accepting
more risk
b. A mutual fund seeking safe returns for a small portion of its portfolio.
c. An insurance company that sells annuities to clients expected to retire
starting in approximately fifteen years

511

512

Learning Module 19

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
Mortgage-Backed Security (MBS) Instrument and Market Features

вҖӢ

Tranche

Investor Type

Tranche A Notes
Principal Amount: USD50 million
Coupon Rate: 3.75%
Maturity Date: [Five Years from
Settlement Date]
Tranche B Notes
Principal Amount: USD30 million
Coupon Rate: 3.95%
Maturity Date: [Fifteen Years from
Settlement Date]
Tranche C Notes
Principal Amount: USD20 million
Coupon Rate: 4.05%
Maturity Date: [Thirty Years from
Settlement Date]
вҖӢ

Solution:
вҖӢ

Tranche

Investor Type

Tranche A Notes
Principal Amount: USD50 million
Coupon Rate: 3.75%
Maturity Date: [Five Years from
Settlement Date]

b) A mutual fund seeking safe returns
for a small portion of its portfolio.

Tranche B Notes
Principal Amount: USD30 million
Coupon Rate: 3.95%
Maturity Date: [Fifteen Years from
Settlement Date]

c) An insurance company that sells
annuities to clients expected to retire
starting in approximately fifteen years.

Tranche C Notes
Principal Amount: USD20 million
Coupon Rate: 4.05%
Maturity Date: [Thirty Years from
Settlement Date]

a) A pension fund looking for higher
returns in exchange for accepting more
risk.

вҖӢ

Other CMO Structures
The cash flows from an underlying mortgage pool can be structured in additional
ways. The structures below describe various tranches that are created through time
tranching (Z-tranche and residual tranche) or by splitting up cash flows from the pool.
в– 

Z-Tranches do not pay interest payments until a pre-set date, when both
principal and accrued interest payments start. During the accrual period at
each payment date, the principal value of the Z-tranche is credited by the
stated coupon rate. Typically, Z-tranches are the last tranche in a series of
sequential or PAC and companion tranches. A Z-tranche benefits the other
tranches because it frees up cash flows that other tranches can distribute. At
the same time, holders of the Z-tranche do not face reinvestment risk when
market yields decline. Z-tranches usually have average lives in excess of 20
years. This makes these tranches risky and hard to value. Z-tranches are also
known as accretion bonds or accrual bonds.

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
Residential Mortgage-Backed Securities (RMBS)

в– 

Principal-Only (PO) securities pay only the principal repayments from the
pool. These securities can be created either from mortgage pass-throughs
or as a tranche in a CMO. Because PO investors receive the face value of
their securities through scheduled principal payments and prepayments, the
value of these securities is very sensitive to prepayment rates and interest
rates. With falling interest rates or when prepayments accelerate, the value
of the PO will increase.

в– 

Interest-Only (IO) securities pay their holders only the interest payments
from the pool. IO securities are a companion of the PO securities in a CMO
transaction. These securities have no face or par value. With increased
prepayments, the cash flows paid to the IO investors decline. That is why
investors use IOs to hedge their portfolios against interest rate risk.

в– 

Floating-Rate tranches carry interest rates that are linked to an index or a
market reference rate. The interest rates are variable and are often subject
to both a cap and a floor rate. These tranches are impacted by how interest
rate movements affect prepayment rates. Floating-rate tranches can also be
structured as inverse floaters, where the interest paid changes in the opposite direction of the change in interest rates. They are used to hedge interest
rate risk in portfolios.

в– 

Residual tranches collect any remaining cash flow from the pool after all the
obligations to the other tranches are met. These investments are appropriate
for investors that can assume the risk and hedge it. Such investors include
hedge funds and long-term institutional investors. Banks typically avoid
such investments due to capital requirements.

в– 

A further evolution of the sequential pay CMO are CMOs that include
Planned Amortization Class (PAC) tranches, occasionally accompanied by
support tranches. PAC tranches offer greater predictability and stability of
the cash flows. These tranches make scheduled and fixed principal payments
over a predetermined time period to their investors if the prepayment levels
in the pool are within a certain maximum and minimum range. If the prepayment rate is within the specified range, all prepayment risk is absorbed
by the support tranche.

QUESTION SET
The following table is used for questions 1, 2, and 3:
Shown below are five mortgages that comprise the entire pool in a
mortgage-backed security.
вҖӢ

Mortgage

Interest
Rate
(i)

Beginning
Balance
(BB)

Current
Balance
(CB)

A

2.00%

CAD200,000

CAD83,000

420

140

B

3.00%

CAD300,000

CAD193,000

360

192

4.00%

CAD400,000

CAD315,000

360

240

D

5.00%

CAD500,000

CAD357,000

240

144

6.00%

CAD600,000

CAD548,000

420

324

C

E

CAD2,000,000

CAD1,496,000
вҖӢ

Original Number of
Term
Months to
(Months) Maturity

513

514

Learning Module 19

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
Mortgage-Backed Security (MBS) Instrument and Market Features

1. The WAC for this security is closest to:
A. 4.00%.
B. 4.50%.
C. 4.73%.
Solution:
The correct answer is C. The weighted average coupon is calculated by
weighting the mortgage rate of each mortgage in the pool by the percentage
of the outstanding mortgage balance relative to the outstanding amount of
all the mortgages in the pool, as shown in the equation below.

(вҖӢвҲ‘ CBвҖӢ)
C вҖӢBвҖӢ вҖӢ

(вҖӢвҲ‘ CBвҖӢ)

(вҖӢвҲ‘ CBвҖӢ)

C вҖӢBC
вҖӢвҖӢ

C вҖӢBвҖӢ вҖӢ

(вҖӢвҲ‘ CBвҖӢ)

(вҖӢвҲ‘ CBвҖӢ)

C вҖӢBвҖӢ вҖӢ

C вҖӢBвҖӢ вҖӢ

	вҖӢWAC = вҖӢiAвҖӢ вҖӢ _
вҖӢ A вҖӢ вҖӢ+ вҖӢiBвҖӢ вҖӢ _
вҖӢ B вҖӢ вҖӢ+ вҖӢiC
вҖӢвҖӢ _
вҖӢ
вҖӢ вҖӢ+ вҖӢiD
вҖӢвҖӢ _
вҖӢ D вҖӢ вҖӢ+ вҖӢiEвҖӢ вҖӢ _
вҖӢ EвҖӢ вҖӢ
вҖӢ1, 496, 000 )
вҖӢ вҖӢ+ 3.00%вҖӢ(_
вҖӢ1, 496, 000 вҖӢ)вҖӢ+ 4.00%вҖӢ(_
вҖӢ1, 496, 000 )
вҖӢвҖӢ
WAC = 2.00%вҖӢ(_
	вҖӢвҖҜвҖҜвҖҜвҖҜвҖҜвҖҜвҖӢвҖӢ
357, 000
548, 000
+ 5.00%вҖӢ(_
вҖӢ1, 496, 000 вҖӢ)вҖӢ+ 6.00%вҖӢ(_
вҖӢ1, 496, 000 вҖӢ)вҖӢ
83, 000

193, 000

315, 000

WAC = 4.73%.
A is incorrect because it is calculated as a straight average of the five interest
rates of the five mortgages in the pool.
B is incorrect because it is calculated by weighting the mortgage rate of each
mortgage in the pool by its percentage of the poolвҖҷs total beginning mortgage balance, not by its percentage of the poolвҖҷs current mortgage balance.
2. Referring to the Summary of Terms for the Sequential-Pay CMO Structure
with Three Tranches Government Housing Trust, pool 917-37 shown in
Exhibit 3, identify the investor most likely to select each tranche.
вҖӢ

Investor

Tranche

1. A fund that is expected to provide
retirement benefits beginning in about
ten years

A. Tranche A

2. A long-term fund seeking high
returns

B. Tranche B

3. A foundation that expects to award
sizeable grants for medical research
within the next few years and wants to
avoid extension risk

C. Tranche C

вҖӢ

Solution:
1. B is correct. A fund that expects to provide retirement benefits in
about ten years may opt for a tranche, such as Tranche B. (In the
sequential-pay CMO structure, the tranches have average lives that
are shorter or longer than the underlying collateral, thereby attracting
investors who have preferences for different average lives.)
2. C is correct. A long-term fund seeking high returns would most
likely be willing to assume more risk in order to achieve those higher
returns. Tranche C has the longest term and is the riskiest of the three
tranches.

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
Commercial Mortgage-Backed Securities (CMBS)

515

3. A is correct. A foundation that requires funding within the next few
years and thus wants to avoid extension risk (the risk that borrowers
will slow down payments and not meet scheduled payment timelines)
most likely would opt for Tranche A.
3. Determine the correct answers to complete the following sentences:
The tranching structure in the CMOs cannot eliminate _________________
but can redistribute it across the different tranches, insulating some
more than others. Across the range of CMO structures, the more senior a tranche is, the less exposure it has to _____________________ and
_________________.
Solution:

The tranching structure in the CMOs cannot eliminate prepayment risk but
can redistribute it across the different tranches, insulating some more than
others. Across the range of CMO structures, the more senior a tranche is,
the less exposure it has to prepayment risk and default risk.

COMMERCIAL MORTGAGE-BACKED SECURITIES
(CMBS)
describe characteristics and risks of commercial mortgage-backed
securities
Commercial mortgage-backed securities (CMBS) are backed by a pool of commercial mortgages on income-producing property, such as multifamily properties (e.g.,
apartment buildings), office buildings, industrial properties (including warehouses),
shopping centers, hotels, and health care facilities (e.g., senior housing care facilities).
Repayment can be made from leases and other revenue the property generates. The
collateral is a pool of commercial loans that were originated either to finance a commercial property acquisition or to refinance a prior mortgage obligation. Exhibit 7
provides an example of a CMBS structure where the mortgages on several properties
owned by the hypothetical car manufacturer Bright Wheel Automotive (BRWA), used
in previous lessons, are securitized.

5

516

Learning Module 19

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
Mortgage-Backed Security (MBS) Instrument and Market Features

Exhibit 7: Sequential Pay CMBS, Summary of Terms
CMBS SPE
Commercial Finance Partners
Assets

Liabilities

WAC = 4.66%
WAM = 88 mos.

GBP 100 million

Office Bldg: GBP 21m
FMV: GBP 27m, 4.0%
Maturity: 5 Yrs

Tranche A: GBP 25m
2.5%, Maturity 3 Yrs

Factory Bldg: GBP 32m
FMV: GBP 40m, 6.0%
Maturity: 5 Yrs

Tranche B: GBP 25m
4.25%, Maturity 10 Yrs

Office Bldg: GBP 30m
FMV: GBP 36m, 3.5%
Maturity: 10 Yrs

Tranche C: GBP 25m
4.75%, Maturity 10 Yrs

Warehouse: GBP 17m
FMV: GBP 20m, 5.0%
Maturity: 10 Yrs

Tranche D: GBP 25m
5.75%, Maturity 10 Yrs

In this specific transaction, properties valued at GBP123 million serve as collateral
for GBP100 million mortgages, giving an LTV of 81.3%, which provides GBP23 million excess collateral for the mortgage lender. The lender then transfers the GBP100
million mortgages to an independent entity, Commercial Finance Associates, which
then through the securitization process issues securities backed by the mortgages.
Effectively, the weighted average proceeds from the mortgages (WAMP) are 4.66%
and the weighted coupon payment 4.075%, where the spread provides compensation
for arranging the securitization. For simplicity, all the mortgages are fully amortizing;
in practice, commercial mortgages are balloon loans and not fully amortizing.
An additional feature of this transaction is that the cash flows do not immediately
match across time horizons, including a Tranche A that is repaid in 3 years and carries
a lower interest rate than any of the mortgages. However, the pool generates sufficient
cash flows to make these payments, and the mortgages do not allow any prepayment
during their first 5 years.
CMBS transactions are common in many markets. In the United States, CMBS
transactions pool a larger number of commercial mortgages. Some transactions focus
on mortgages on specific property types (such as warehouses and multi-family residential) or specific geographic areas (such as the Northeast or the Southwest United
States). Others pool commercial mortgages from one lender. A small, but sizable,
portion of the US market focuses on securitizing a single loan backed typically by
one high value, marquee property in a major city. Akin to these single asset deals are
single borrower deals where the CMBS transaction securitizes multiple commercial
mortgage loans from one borrower.
Outside the United States, the volume of CMBS transactions is growing, particularly
in Europe. European CMBS transactions have some structural differences reflecting
differences in legal standards, commercial credit conventions, and bankruptcy. For
instance, many European CMBS securitize a few loans in each transaction, but these
loans can originate from different European countries. This introduces legal risk to
the transaction because in the event of foreclosure or bankruptcy, the sale of the
property must follow local rules that can be vastly different across Europe. Typically,
European CMBS carry a floating rate, but that rate may be capped, while US CMBS

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
Commercial Mortgage-Backed Securities (CMBS)

usually pay a fixed rate and only occasionally offer a floating rate. Overall, CMBS deals
require more direct understanding of the legal, financial, and commercial structures
underlying each mortgage in the securitization transaction.

CMBS Structure
Both the CMBS and RMBS securitization processes and securitization structures,
respectively are highly similar. However, two features specific to CMBS structures are
worth mentioning: the presence of call protection and the balloon maturity provision.
Call Protection
A critical investment feature that distinguishes CMBS from RMBS is the protection
against early prepayments. Call protection is available to investors in CMBS, which
results in CMBS trading more like corporate bonds than RMBS. The call protection
comes either at the structure level or at the loan level.
Structural call protection is achieved through sequential-pay tranches in the
CMBS: A lower-rated tranche cannot be paid down until the higher-rated tranche
is completely retired. Principal losses are always borne by the junior tranches first.
Call protection on the individual loan level relies on three mechanisms, usually
through covenants. The first is prepayment lockout, a contractual agreement that
prohibits any prepayments during a specified period. Second, the loan agreement can
also stipulate prepayment penalty points, predetermined penalties that a borrower
who wants to refinance must pay to the CMBS SPE. A point is equal to 1.00% of the
outstanding loan balance.
Third, defeasance is a mechanism that allows prepayment, but the borrower must
purchase a portfolio of government securities that fully replicates the cash flows of
the remaining scheduled principal and interest payments, including the balloon loan
balance, on the loan. When the last obligation is paid off, the value of the portfolio is
zero (that is, no funds remain). The cost of assembling such a portfolio is the cost of
defeasing the loan that must be paid by the issuer.
Balloon Maturity Provision
Another material difference lies in the structure of commercial mortgages. Unlike most
residential mortgages, which are self-amortizing, commercial real estate loans are not
fully amortizing. They usually pay interest payments and some principal repayments
throughout the loan with the balance of the unamortized principal repaid at maturity
through a large вҖңballoonвҖқ payment. At loan maturity (e.g., the end of year 5 or year 10),
the borrower must make the remaining balloon payment to pay down the principal.
Many commercial loans backing CMBS are balloon loans that require a substantial
principal repayment at the maturity of the loan. There are several reasons why a borrower may fail to make the balloon payment at maturity. First, the borrower may not
be able to refinance the existing mortgage to roll the balloon loan into a new loan due
to the borrowerвҖҷs deteriorating debt service coverage or LTV ratios. Lenders also may
not be able to extend the terms of the existing loan given the economic environment.
Finally, the borrower may not be able to sell the property to generate sufficient funds
to pay off the outstanding principal balance.
Balloon risk is the risk that the borrower fails to make the balloon payment at
maturity and is in default. In this case, the lender may extend the loan over a period
known as the вҖңworkout period,вҖқ and modify the original terms of the loan during
the workout period. Because the life of the loan is extended by the lender during the
workout period, balloon risk is a type of extension risk.

517

518

Learning Module 19

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
Mortgage-Backed Security (MBS) Instrument and Market Features

CMBS Risks
Another significant difference between RMBS and CMBS is that a RMBS pool may
consist of thousands of mortgages from various parts of a country, while CMBS can
consist of a few underlying commercial mortgages. With RMBS collateralized by
relatively homogeneous single-family residential properties, individual defaults can
be frequent but have minimal impact on security holders due to the small size of any
one mortgage in the RMBS pool. A single default in a CMBS pool, on the other hand,
can have a significant impact on the CMBS investors. Investors in the CMBS must
explicitly consider this unique concentration risk by not only analyzing the CMBS
structure but also by analyzing the individual loans and properties backing the CMBS
and the owners of the commercial properties themselves.
In commercial real estate lending, the key indicators of potential credit performance
are the loan-to-value ratio (LTV), which was discussed earlier, and the debt service
coverage ratio (DSCR or DSC ratio), like the debt-to-income ratio. The DSC ratio is
equal to the propertyвҖҷs annual net operating income (NOI) divided by the debt service.
Net Operating Income

	вҖӢDSC = ________________
вҖӢвҖҜвҖҜ
вҖҜвҖҜ
вҖӢ
Debt Service
NOI is defined as the rental income reduced by cash operating expenses and a non-cash
replacement reserve reflecting the depreciation of the property over time.
	вҖӢNOI = вҖӢ(Rental income вҲ’ cash operating expenses)вҖӢвҲ’ replacement reservesвҖӢ.
NOI excludes principal and interest payments on loans, capital expenditures, depreciation, and amortization.
Note that debt service is the annual amount of interest payments and principal
repayments. A DSC ratio that exceeds 1.0Г— indicates that the cash flows from the
property are sufficient to cover the debt service while maintaining the property in its
initial state of repair. The higher the DSC ratio, the more likely it is that the borrower
will be able to meet debt-servicing requirements from the propertyвҖҷs cash flows.
EXAMPLE 5

Debt Service Coverage Ratio Calculation
The first property listed in Exhibit 7 has an estimated fair market value of GBP27
million. Its net operating income is GBP7,590,000 million. With annual debt
service of GBP4,717,169 its DSC ratio is 1.61Г—, as shown below. This DSC level
indicates that the propertyвҖҷs cash flows are more than sufficient to cover the debt
service while maintaining the property in its initial state of repair.вҖӢвҖӢ
GBP 7, 590, 000

вҖҜвҖҜ
	вҖӢDSC = ____________
вҖӢвҖҜвҖҜ
GBP
4, 717, 169 вҖӢ= 1.61Г—.
Lenders must evaluate the cash flow generating capacity of the property
closely because commercial mortgages are non-recourse loans, where the lenders
can look only to the income-producing property serving as collateral for the
loan to satisfy the debt in foreclosure.
Exhibit 8 compares representative aspects of CMBS and RMBS.

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
Commercial Mortgage-Backed Securities (CMBS)

Exhibit 8: CMBS vs. RMBS
CMBS

RMBS

Underlying assets

From one to a pool of commercial mortgages on
income-producing property

A pool of mortgages backed by
residential properties or a pool
of RMBS

Issuer

в– 

Lenders, commercial banks,
investment banks, or syndicates of banks

в– 

A government or a quasi-government entity or by a bank,
financial institution, or other
private business

Rate for security

в– 

Europe вҖ“ Floating rate; may be
capped

в– 

Either fixed or floating rate

в– 

US вҖ“ typically fixed rate

в– 

May be high, since the assets
backing the CMBS can be concentrated in one mortgage or a
small number (as compared to
the number backing an RMBS)

в– 

Agency RMBS вҖ“ Issued
and fully guaranteed by the
government or a quasi-government entity

в– 

Non-agency RMBS вҖ“ Issued
by banks, financial institutions, or other private
businesses that use credit
enhancements to reduce
credit risk

в– 

contraction risk вҖ“ Low No prepayment risk since commercial
loans either do not offer a
prepayment option or make
prepayment uneconomical

в– 

в– 

extension risk - High Balloon
risk вҖ“ Many commercial loans
backing CMBS are balloon. If
balloon payment not made, the
lender may extend the life of
the loan, leading to extension
risk

contraction risk вҖ“ High
Particularly during periods
of declining or persistently
low interest rates, or when
the value of the underlying
properties increase.

в– 

extension risk вҖ“ High
Particularly during periods
of increasing interest rates or
high interest rates, or when
the value of the underlying
properties stays stable or
declines.

в– 

Aggregate risk may be lower
due to diversification from
many small, uniform underlying mortgages.

Risk aspect: Credit
Risk

Risk aspect:
Prepayment Risk

Risk aspect: Default
Risk

Depends on:
в– 

Security held: Pool based on
few mortgages (high) or RMBS
pools (lower)

в– 

Concentration of pool: Pool
of few mortgages (high) vs. a
diversified pool (lower)

QUESTION SET
1. Determine the correct answers to complete the following sentences:
A critical investment feature that distinguishes CMBS from RMBS is the
protection against early prepayments. Call protection is available to inves-

519

520

Learning Module 19

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
Mortgage-Backed Security (MBS) Instrument and Market Features

tors in _______, which results in the securities trading more like corporate
bonds than _______.
Solution:

A critical investment feature that distinguishes CMBS from RMBS is the
protection against early prepayments. Call protection is available to investors in CMBS, which results in the securities trading more like corporate
bonds than RMBS.
2. Using the information below for a 3,000 square foot warehouse and its loan,
determine if the debt service coverage (DSC) ratio in year 5 is most likely:
вҖӢ

5.0%, Ten-Year CAD450,000 Loan with Twenty Year Amortization
Rental Rate

USD20/square foot/year

Rental Income

USD60,000

Cash Operating Expenses
в– 

Property Taxes

USD6,000

в– 

Insurance

USD2,000

в– 

Property Maintenance

USD1,500

Depreciation

USD10,000

Annual payment (principal &
interest) вҖ“ years 1вҖ“10

USD36,110
вҖӢ

A. above 1.
B. 1.
C. below 1.
Solution:
The correct answer is A. The debt service coverage ratio (DSC) is calculated
as:
Net Operating Income

	вҖӢDSC = ________________
вҖӢвҖҜвҖҜ
вҖҜвҖҜ
вҖӢ
Debt Service
вҖӢ(Rental Income вҲ’ Cash Operating Expenses )вҖӢ

вҖҜвҖҜвҖҜвҖҜ
вҖӢ
	вҖӢDSC = _____________________________________
вҖӢвҖҜвҖҜвҖҜвҖҜ
Annual Debt Service вҖӢ(principal + interest payments)вҖӢ
вҖӢ(60, 000 вҲ’ 9, 500 )вҖӢ

вҖӢ
	вҖӢDSC = _____________
вҖӢвҖҜвҖҜ
36, 110
USD 50, 500

	вҖӢDSC = _
вҖӢ 36, 110 вҖӢ = 1.3985вҖӢГ—.
B and C are incorrect because the calculated DSC ratio is above 1.0Г—, not
equal to or below 1.
3. Which of the following mechanisms is least likely to offer investors protection from default on the individual loan level?
A. Defeasance
B. Balloon payment structure
C. Prepayment penalty points
Solution:
The correct answer is B. Typically, commercial real estate loans are not
fully amortizing and thus require the unamortized principal to be repaid at

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
Commercial Mortgage-Backed Securities (CMBS)

maturity through a large вҖңballoonвҖқ payment. If the borrower fails to make
the balloon payment at maturity and is in default, then balloon risk results.
Thus, the balloon payment structure increases risk to investors, rather than
protecting against it. A is incorrect because defeasance, a mechanism that
requires the borrower to purchase a portfolio of government securities that
replicates the cash flows of the remaining scheduled principal and interest payments remaining on the loan, protects the investor. C is incorrect
because prepayment penalty points (i.e., predetermined penalties that a
borrower who wants to refinance must pay to the lender) offer investors call
protection on the individual loan level.
4. Relative to RMBS loan pools, CMBS loan pools exhibit less:
A. credit risk.
B. prepayment risk.
C. concentration risk.
Solution:
The correct answer is B. CMBS loans exhibit less prepayment risk because
commercial loans either do not offer prepayment options or make prepayment uneconomical. Conversely, RMBS loans are freely prepayable, thus
prepayment risk is higher. A is incorrect because CMBS loans have higher
credit risk because the assets backing the CMBS can be concentrated in
one mortgage or a small number of mortgages (as compared to the large
number backing an RMBS). In addition, agency RMBS are issued and fully
guaranteed by the government or a quasi-government entity, and non-agency RMBS are issued by banks, financial institutions, or other private businesses, which use credit enhancements to reduce credit risk. C is incorrect
because CMBS loan pools exhibit more concentration risk than RMBS loan
pools. CMBS loan pools exhibit a fewer number of loans and will have some
larger loans that create concentration risk.

521

522

Learning Module 19

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
Mortgage-Backed Security (MBS) Instrument and Market Features

PRACTICE PROBLEMS
The following information relates to questions
1-2
Please refer to the information below to answer questions 1 and 2 regarding the
bonds securitized by the AR&C leases.
AR&C Limited Securitization of Private Jet Leases
AR&C Limited leases private jets to corporations in North America for a fixed
term of five years. AR&C retains ownership of the jets. The corporations make
equal interest payments each month. If a customer defaults, AR&C can repossess
the jet. AR&C has been in business for approximately fifteen years and has a B3
credit rating, meaning that its debt is non-investment grade. AR&C has CAD500
million in leases on its balance sheet that it wants to securitize into ABS.
AR&C

Leasing of Jets

Customers

Cash Payments
for Leases

Sale of the Leases

Periodic Cash
Payments

Special Purpose Entity

Issuance and
Sale of ABS

Cash Payments
for ABS

Investors

Bond Class
A (senior)

Tranche A Notes
Face value: CAD250 million
Interest rate: MRR + 1.00%
Maturity: One year

B (subordinated)

Tranche B Notes
Face value: CAD100 million
Interest rate: MRR + 2.00%
Maturity: Two years

C (subordinated)

Tranche C Notes
Face value: CAD100 million
Interest rate: MRR + 3.00%
Maturity: Three years

Periodic Cash
Payments to
Investors

Practice Problems

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.

Bond Class
D (subordinated)

Tranche D Notes
Face value: CAD50 million
Interest rate: MRR + 4.00%
Maturity: Four years

Total

CAD500 million

1. Compare the credit rating of the Class A bonds issued by the SPE and the uncollateralized bonds issued directly by AR&C. The Class A bonds are most likely
rated:
A. lower than AR&C bonds.
B. the same as AR&C bonds.
C. higher than AR&C bonds.
2. Select which of the following statements related to the collateralized bonds issued directly by the SPE is most accurate.
A. This senior/subordinated structure is an example of time tranching.
B. Losses are realized by the subordinated bond classes before any losses are
realized by Class A bonds.
C. In a waterfall structure such as this one, losses are shared proportionally
across all subordinated bond classes.

The following information relates to questions
3-4
A borrower wishes to procure a mortgage loan to purchase a property. Information regarding the property, the desired loan, and the buyerвҖҷs finances is shown
below:
в– 

Property price: CAD750,000

в– 

Desired loan amount: CAD525,000

в– 

Annual interest rate: 5.00%

в– 

Loan term: 30 years/360 months

в– 

Monthly payment: CAD2,818.31

в– 

BorrowerвҖҷs annual pre-tax gross income: CAD210,000

3. The loan-to-value (LTV) ratio is closest to:
A. 54%.
B. 66%.
C. 70%.

523

524

Learning Module 19

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
Mortgage-Backed Security (MBS) Instrument and Market Features

4. The debt-to-income (DTI) ratio is closest to:
A. 1.30%.
B. 16.10%.
C. 250.00%.
5. For a CMO that includes Planned Amortization Class (PAC) tranches, if the
prepayment rate is within the anticipated range, which of the following tranches
most likely protects investors from prepayment risk?
A. PAC tranche
B. Senior tranche
C. Support tranche
6. Which of the following approaches redistributes prepayment risk?
A. Tranching
B. Excess spread
C. Overcollateralization
7. Shown below are five mortgages that comprise the entire pool in a
mortgage-backed security.

Mortgage

Interest
Rate
(i)

Beginning
Balance
(BB)

A

2.00%

CAD200,000

3.00%

B

C

D
E

Original
Term
(months)

Number of
Months to
Maturity

CAD83,000

420

140

CAD300,000

CAD193,000

360

192

4.00%

CAD400,000

CAD315,000

360

240

5.00%

CAD500,000

CAD357,000

240

144

6.00%

CAD600,000

CAD548,000

420

324

CAD2,000,000

CAD1,496,000

Current Balance
(CB)

The WAM for this security is closest to:
A. 208 months.
B. 224 months.
C. 236 months.
8. Which of the following adverse consequences is most likely associated with
extension risk?
A. Investors must reinvest the proceeds at lower interest rates.
B. Higher interest rates reduce the value of the cash flows investors receive.
C. The prepayment option reduces the potential price appreciation for the
bond.

Practice Problems

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.

The following information relates to questions
9-11
Use the following information for questions 9, 10, and 11:
Shown below are three properties whose mortgages are securitized to create a
sequential-pay CMBS and information related to the four tranches comprising
the CMBS.
Property Information
Property
Type

Fair Market
Value

Mortgaged
Amount

Coupon
Rate

Office
Building

35,000,000

27,000,000

Office
Building

60,000,000

Warehouse

15,000,000

Maturity

Repayment

4.00%

Four years
from settlement date

Fully
amortizing

44,000,000

3.00%

Four years
from settlement date

Fully
amortizing

12,000,000

5.00%

Eight years
from settlement date

Fully
amortizing

Prepayment: No prepayment on the underlying mortgages is allowed in the first
5 years.
Tranche Information
Tranche
A

B

C

D

Coupon Rate

Principal Value

2.00%

20,000,000

3.00%

22,000,000

4.00%

23,000,000

5.00%

18,000,000

9. The associated loan to value ratio is closest to:
A. 0.75.
B. 0.77.
C. 0.80.
10. The weighted average coupon payment is closest to:
A. 3.47%.
B. 3.50%.
C. 3.61%.
11. The weighted average proceeds from the mortgages is closest to:
A. 3.47%.
B. 3.50%.

525

526

Learning Module 19

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
Mortgage-Backed Security (MBS) Instrument and Market Features

C. 3.61%.
12. Which of the following would most likely increase balloon risk for a commercial
mortgage loan that is maturing?
A. High DSCR
B. Low LTV ratio
C. Lack of property buyers in market
13. Which of the following provides call protection for CMBS investors at the structural level?
A. Defeasance
B. Prepayment lockout
C. Sequential-pay tranches

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.

Solutions

SOLUTIONS
1. The correct answer is C. The Class A bonds issued by the SPE are backed by collateral, the leases sold by AR&C to the SPE, and they are the most senior of the
bonds issued by the SPE. A secured bond is secured by collateral and is considered less risky than a bond without collateral backing. The Class A bonds issued
by the SPE would most likely be rated higher than any unsecured corporate bonds
issued directly by AR&C.
2. The correct answer is B. Losses are realized by the subordinated bond classes
before any losses are realized by the senior Class A bonds. A is incorrect because
this senior/subordinated structure is an example of credit tranching, not time
tranching. C is incorrect because in a waterfall structure such as this one, the
most junior tranche, Class D, will absorb all losses up to its full CAD50 million
par value first. Then, if credit losses exceed that threshold, Bond Class C will absorb all losses up to its full CAD100 million par value. The losses are not shared
proportionally across all subordinated bond classes; instead, they are absorbed by
the most junior classes first and subsequently by the more senior ones up to the
value of the loss.
3. The correct answer is C. The loan-to-value ratio (LTV) is the ratio of the amount
of the loan/mortgage to the propertyвҖҷs value.
Amount of the loan / mortgage

	вҖӢ LTV = _____________________
вҖӢвҖҜвҖҜвҖҜ
вҖҜвҖҜ
вҖӢ
Property's value
525, 000

	вҖӢLTV = _
вҖӢ750, 000 вҖӢ
	вҖӢLTV = 70%вҖӢ.
A is incorrect because it was calculated as the monthly payment divided by the
beginning loan value, not the loan to property value, as follows:
2, 818.31

	вҖӢ _
вҖӢ525, 000 вҖӢ= 0.54%вҖӢ.
Note: This is 0.54%, not 54%. Choice A was adjusted to 54% to make the correct
answer less obvious.
B is incorrect because it was calculated as the monthly payment for a 20-year
loan, not a 30-year loan, divided by the beginning loan value, not the loan to
property value, as follows:
3, 464.77

	вҖӢ _
вҖӢ525, 000 вҖӢ= 0.66%вҖӢ.
Note: This is 0.66%, not 66%. Choice B was adjusted to 66% to make the correct
answer less obvious.
4. The correct answer is B. The DTI is calculated using the monthly debt payment
and the borrowerвҖҷs monthly pre-tax gross income, as follows:
Monthly Debt Payment

	вҖӢDTI = _______________________
вҖӢвҖҜвҖҜ
вҖҜвҖҜвҖҜ
Monthly
pre вҲ’ tax gross income вҖӢ
CAD 2, 818.31

вҖҜвҖҜ
вҖӢ = 16.10%вҖӢ.
	вҖӢDTI = ______________
вҖӢвҖҜвҖҜ
вҖӢ(CAD 210, 000 / 12)вҖӢ
A is incorrect because it was calculated as the monthly payment divided by the
annual pre-tax gross income, as follows:

527

528

Learning Module 19

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
Mortgage-Backed Security (MBS) Instrument and Market Features

2, 818.31

_
	вҖӢ 210, 000 вҖӢ = 1.30%вҖӢ.

C is incorrect because it was calculated as the starting loan value divided by the
annual pre-tax gross income, as follows:
525, 000

_
	вҖӢ 210, 000 вҖӢ = 250.00%вҖӢ.

5. The correct answer is C. If the prepayment rate is within the specified range,
all prepayment risk is absorbed by the support tranche. This provides greater
predictability of the size and timing of cash flows paid to investors in the PAC
tranches.
A is incorrect because in a CMO that includes a PAC tranche, the PAC tranche is
protected from prepayment risk because all prepayment risk is absorbed by the
support tranche.
B is incorrect because in a CMO that includes a PAC tranche, the senior (PAC)
tranche is protected from prepayment risk because all prepayment risk is absorbed by the support tranche.
6. The correct answer is A. The tranching structure in CMOs cannot eliminate prepayment risk, but it can redistribute prepayment risk across the different tranches, insulating some tranches more than others. CMO tranche structures reduce
the uncertainties of the size and timing of payments investors receive.
B and C are incorrect because excess spread and overcollateralization are both
common forms of credit enhancement, but they do not redistribute prepayment
risk.
7. The correct answer is C. The weighted average maturity is calculated by weighting the number of months to maturity for each mortgage in the pool by the percentage of the outstanding mortgage balance relative to the outstanding amount
of all the mortgages in the pool, as shown in the following equation:

(вҖӢвҲ‘

вҖӢ)

C вҖӢBвҖӢ вҖӢ

(вҖӢвҲ‘

вҖӢ)

C вҖӢBвҖӢ вҖӢ

(вҖӢвҲ‘

вҖӢ)

C вҖӢBвҖӢCвҖӢ

вҖӢ
вҖӢ вҖӢ
вҖӢ A вҖӢ вҖӢ+ M вҖӢMBвҖӢ вҖӢ _
вҖӢ B вҖӢ вҖӢ+ M вҖӢMC
вҖӢвҖӢ _
WAM = M вҖӢMAвҖӢ вҖӢ _
CB

CB

CB

вҖҜвҖҜвҖҜвҖҜвҖҜвҖӢ вҖӢ
	вҖӢ
C вҖӢBвҖӢ вҖӢ
C вҖӢBвҖӢ вҖӢ
+ M вҖӢMD
вҖӢвҖӢ _
вҖӢ D вҖӢ вҖӢ+ M вҖӢMEвҖӢ вҖӢ _
вҖӢ EвҖӢ вҖӢ

(вҖӢвҲ‘ CBвҖӢ)

(вҖӢвҲ‘ CBвҖӢ)

WAM = 140вҖӢ(_
вҖӢ1, 496, 000 вҖӢ)вҖӢ+ 192вҖӢ(_
вҖӢ1, 496, 000 вҖӢ)вҖӢ+ 240вҖӢ(_
вҖӢ1, 496, 000 вҖӢ)вҖӢ
	вҖӢвҖҜвҖҜвҖҜвҖҜвҖҜвҖҜвҖӢвҖӢ
357, 000
548, 000
+ 144вҖӢ(_
вҖӢ1, 496, 000 вҖӢ)вҖӢ+ 324вҖӢ(_
вҖӢ1, 496, 000 вҖӢ)вҖӢ
83, 000

193, 000

315, 000

WAM = 236 months.
A is incorrect because it is calculated by averaging the months to maturity for the
five mortgages, rather than calculating their weighted average.
B is incorrect because it is calculated by weighting the number of months to maturity for each mortgage in the pool by the percentage of the beginning mortgage
balance relative to the beginning amount of all the mortgages in the pool, not by
the current balances.
8. The correct answer is B. Extension risk is the risk that the borrower might pay
back the money borrowed more slowly than anticipated, extending the time
of repayment and the maturity of the bond. For investors, this has one adverse
consequence: Higher interest rates reduce the value of the cash flows investors
receive. The payments the investors receive will be discounted at a higher interest

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.

Solutions

rate, and the extension stretches out the payments the investors receive.
A is incorrect because contraction risk (the risk that the borrower might pay
back the money borrowed more quickly than anticipated, reducing the amount of
future payments the investor receives), not extension risk, has the adverse consequence that investors must reinvest the proceeds at lower interest rates.
C is incorrect because contraction risk (the risk that the borrower might pay
back the money borrowed more quickly than anticipated, reducing the amount
of future payments the investor receives), not extension risk, has the adverse
consequence that the prepayment option reduces the potential price appreciation
for the bond.
9. The correct answer is A. The associated loan to value ratio is calculated as the
total value of all loans (mortgages) divided by the total value of the properties
associated with the mortgages, as follows:
Total value of all loans вҖӢ(mortgages)вҖӢ

вҖҜвҖҜвҖҜ
	вҖӢLTV = ____________________________
вҖӢвҖҜвҖҜвҖҜ
Total
value of all properties mortgaged вҖӢ
83, 000, 000

	вҖӢLTV = _
вҖӢ110, 000, 000 вҖӢ = 0.75вҖӢ.
B is incorrect because 0.77 is the value of just the mortgage on the first property
(27,000,000) divided by the first propertyвҖҷs total value (35,000,000).
C is incorrect because 0.80 is the value of just the mortgage on the third property
(11,400,000) divided by the third propertyвҖҷs total value (15,000,000).
10. The correct answer is A. The weighted average coupon payment is calculated as
the value of each trancheвҖҷs coupon rate weighted by the principal value of that
tranche as a percentage of the total value of all tranches:
	вҖӢWAC = вҖӢiAвҖӢ вҖӢ _
вҖӢ A вҖӢ вҖӢ+ вҖӢiBвҖӢ вҖӢ _
вҖӢ B вҖӢ вҖӢ+ вҖӢiC
вҖӢвҖӢ _
вҖӢ
вҖӢ вҖӢ+ вҖӢiD
вҖӢвҖӢ _
вҖӢ DвҖӢ вҖӢ
(вҖӢвҲ‘ PVвҖӢ)
(вҖӢвҲ‘ PVвҖӢ)
(вҖӢвҲ‘ PVвҖӢ)
(вҖӢвҲ‘ PVвҖӢ)
P вҖӢVвҖӢ вҖӢ

P вҖӢVвҖӢ вҖӢ

P вҖӢVC
вҖӢвҖӢ

P вҖӢVвҖӢ вҖӢ

вҖӢ83, 000, 000 вҖӢ)вҖӢ+ 3.00%вҖӢ(_
вҖӢ83, 000, 000 вҖӢ)вҖӢ
WAC = 2.00%вҖӢ(_
	вҖӢвҖҜвҖҜвҖҜвҖҜвҖҜвҖӢвҖӢ
23, 000, 000
18, 000, 000
+ 4.00%вҖӢ(_
вҖӢ83, 000, 000 вҖӢ)вҖӢ+ 5.00%вҖӢ(_
вҖӢ23, 000, 000 вҖӢ)вҖӢ
20, 000, 000

22, 000, 000

	вҖӢWAC = 3.47%вҖӢ.
B is incorrect because 3.50% is calculated as a straight average of the four coupon
rates (of the four tranches), rather than a weighted average.
C is incorrect because 3.61% is the weighted proceeds from the three mortgages,
not the weighted average coupon payment.
11. The correct answer is C. The weighted average proceeds from the mortgages
(WAMP shown below) is calculated as the coupon rate of each mortgage weighted by that mortgageвҖҷs value/amount as a percentage of the total value of all the
mortgages:
вҖӢ A вҖӢ вҖӢ+ вҖӢiBвҖӢ вҖӢ _
вҖӢ B вҖӢ вҖӢ+ вҖӢiC
вҖӢвҖӢ _
вҖӢ
вҖӢ вҖӢ
	вҖӢWAMP = вҖӢiAвҖӢ вҖӢ _
вҲ‘
вҖӢ
вҖӢ
вҲ‘
вҖӢ
вҖӢ
(вҖӢвҲ‘ MAвҖӢ)
( MA )
( MA )
M вҖӢAвҖӢ вҖӢ

M вҖӢAвҖӢ вҖӢ

M вҖӢAвҖӢCвҖӢ

529

530

Learning Module 19

В© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
Mortgage-Backed Security (MBS) Instrument and Market Features
	вҖӢWAMP = 4.00%вҖӢ(_
вҖӢ83, 000, 000 вҖӢ)вҖӢ+ 3.00%вҖӢ(_
вҖӢ83, 000, 000 )
вҖӢ вҖӢ+ 5.00%вҖӢ(_
вҖӢ83, 000, 000 вҖӢ)вҖӢ
27, 000, 000

44, 000, 000

12, 000, 000

WAMP = 3.61%вҖӢ.
	вҖӢ
A is incorrect because 3.47% is the weighted average coupon payment for the
four tranches, not the weighted average proceeds from the mortgages.
B is incorrect because 3.50% is calculated as a straight average of the four coupon rates (of the four tranches), not the weighted average proceeds from the
mortgages.
12. The correct answer is C. A lack of property buyers in the market will make it
challenging for a borrower to sell a property to generate sufficient funds to pay
off the outstanding principal balance. A is incorrect because a high DSCR would
reduce the balloon risk. B is incorrect because a low LTV ratio would also reduce
the balloon risk of a maturing loan.
13. The correct answer is C. Structural call protection is achieved through
sequential-pay tranches in the CMBS as a lower-rated tranche cannot be paid
down until the higher-rated tranche is completely retired. A is incorrect because
defeasance provides call protection at the individual loan level. Defeasance allows
prepayment, but the borrower must purchase a portfolio of government securities that fully replicates the cash flows of the remaining scheduled principal and
interest payments, including the balloon loan balance, on the loan. B is incorrect
because prepayment lockout provides call protection at the individual loan level.
Prepayment lockout is a contractual agreement that prohibits any prepayments
during a specified period.

